# Retrieval inventory, NOT completed visual/claim audit
Source L07: Informative presence and observation in routine health data: A review of methodology for clinical risk prediction; DOI 10.1093/jamia/ocaa242
Original text line numbers. Numbers may be citations, secondary reports,
toy examples, or ambiguous table columns. Verify context before citing.

L9: Abstract Objective Informative presence (IP) is the phenomenon whereby the presence or absence of patient data is potentially informative with respect to their health condition, with informative observation (IO) being the longitudinal equivalent. These phenomena predominantly exist within routinely collected healthcare data, in which data collection is driven by the clinical requirements of patients and clinicians. The extent to which IP and IO are considered when using such data to develop clinical prediction models (CPMs) is unknown, as is the existing methodology aiming at handling these issues. This review aims to synthesize such existing methodology, thereby helping identify an agenda for future methodological work. Materials and Methods A systematic literature search was conducted by 2 independent reviewers using prespecified keywords. Results Thirty-six articles were included. We categorized the methods presented within as derived predictors (including some representation of the measurement process as a predictor in the model), modeling under IP, and latent structures. Including missing indicators or summary measures as predictors is the most commonly presented approach amongst the included studies (24 of 36 articles). Discussion This is the first review to collate the literature in this area under a prediction framework. A considerable body relevant of literature exists, and we present ways in which the described methods could be developed further. Guidance is required for specifying the conditions under which each method should be used to enable applied prediction modelers to use these methods. Conclusions A growing recognition of IP and IO exists within the literature, and methodology is increasingly becoming available to leverage these phenomena for prediction purposes. IP and IO should be approached differently in a prediction context than when the primary goal is explanation. The work included in this review has demonstrated theoretical and empirical benefits of incorporating IP and IO, and therefore we recommend that applied health researchers consider incorporating these methods in their work. Keywords: clinical prediction model, electronic health records, informative observation, informative presence
L23: Thirty-six articles were included. We categorized the methods presented within as derived predictors (including some representation of the measurement process as a predictor in the model), modeling under IP, and latent structures. Including missing indicators or summary measures as predictors is the most commonly presented approach amongst the included studies (24 of 36 articles).
L43: Widespread adoption of electronic health records (EHRs) facilitates the development of CPMs, 1 as detailed clinical and patient information is collected through routine healthcare contacts. Such rich longitudinal information provides long-term patient follow-up without the need to recruit patients and conduct regular follow-up visits. The analysis of routinely collected data is not, however, without challenge. Observation times are not prespecified as they would be in a typical research study (eg, in a prospective cohort study with scheduled follow-up visits). Instead, data are collected opportunistically, in which patient and clinician decisions directly dictate whether we observe clinical biomarkers and patient information. 2 For example, general practitioner visits occur more frequently during periods of ill health, 3 and only information relevant to the particular consultation will be recorded. Equally, during inpatient care, clinicians will adapt their monitoring frequency to the changing needs and condition of the individual patient (see Figure 1 ).
L45: [FIGURE Figure 1.; IMAGE REVIEW REQUIRED] (A) An illustration of informative presence and how this could impact the information available at prediction time. We see the longitudinal pattern of blood pressure for 2 patients, with both their observed and unobserved values shown. Patient 1 has 1 single observed value of systolic blood pressure (BP), and this happens when their BP was at its highest. Patient 2 has no observed values, but their BP remains in the normal range—either the patient or clinician saw no clinical need to take a blood pressure measurement at any time. (B) An illustration of informative observation, taken from the MIMIC (Medical Information Mart for Intensive Care) dataset. 4 Patient 1 has many more in-hospital measurements of blood glucose than patient 2 throughout their intensive care unit admission, likely due to the fact that their blood glucose is much higher and much more variable than patient 2. A more severe condition often means more intense monitoring. [image refs: ocaa242f1.jpg, ocaa242f1.gif]
L47: (A) An illustration of informative presence and how this could impact the information available at prediction time. We see the longitudinal pattern of blood pressure for 2 patients, with both their observed and unobserved values shown. Patient 1 has 1 single observed value of systolic blood pressure (BP), and this happens when their BP was at its highest. Patient 2 has no observed values, but their BP remains in the normal range—either the patient or clinician saw no clinical need to take a blood pressure measurement at any time. (B) An illustration of informative observation, taken from the MIMIC (Medical Information Mart for Intensive Care) dataset. 4 Patient 1 has many more in-hospital measurements of blood glucose than patient 2 throughout their intensive care unit admission, likely due to the fact that their blood glucose is much higher and much more variable than patient 2. A more severe condition often means more intense monitoring.
L51: Informative presence (IP) ( Figure 1A ): The presence or absence of a patient’s data at any given time point carries information about their health status.
L53: Informative observation (IO): The timing, frequency, or intensity (rate) of a patient’s longitudinal pattern of observation carries information about their evolving health state. See Figure 1B for an example.
L55: IP is challenging from a statistical perspective as it implies a missing not at random process. IP is, however, conceptually different from missingness, as in the former, there was never any intention of collecting the data at a particular visit. IP has previously been defined elsewhere, 5 , 6 with Phelan et al 5 discussing how interactions contained within EHRs are informative with respect to patient health.
L57: IO is the continuous time generalization of IP: a longitudinal visiting (at time t) not at random process, defined as “given data recorded up to time t, visiting at time t is not independent of outcome at time t.” 7 By generalizing the definition of IP above, one can draw value from how frequently a patient is observed over time. This is especially true when no schedule exists dictating when or how often visits should occur; we therefore focus on what an individual’s longitudinal observation process could tell us about their condition.
L61: Instead, one could view IP and IO as opportunities to draw information from the EHR that is not explicitly recorded. In this article, we focus on informative measurement patterns in the predictors, and we do not discuss presence or absence of outcome data. Agniel et al 15 demonstrated how the timing of a lab test better predicts mortality than the actual result of the test. Others have illustrated how incorporating the presence or absence of a particular test for an individual into a CPM can improve its accuracy. 16–18
L87: Our database searches identified 6127 studies, of which 111 were retained for full text screening. Eleven of these were deemed eligible for inclusion. We identified a further 25 articles through forward and backward citation searching, giving a final set of 36 included articles ( Figure 2 ).
L89: [FIGURE Figure 2.; IMAGE REVIEW REQUIRED] PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) flow diagram showing the various screening stages and reasons for exclusion at each stage. [image refs: ocaa242f2.jpg, ocaa242f2.gif]
L93: Throughout this section, we will illustrate each method with the following notation. Consider a binary outcome Y t (or Y if only observed once) for patients i = 1 , … , n , at time t , where Y = 1 denotes that the event occurred, with marginal probability P Y = 1 . Define a potentially time-varying continuous covariate process X ( t ) , with potential realizations x i j for i = 1 , … , n and j = 1 , … m i , or simply x i if X is not time-varying. The timing of the j th realization of X t is t i j ∈ R + . Denote R = 1 if X t is ever observed, and R = 0 if not. Define r i j = 1 if the covariate process is observed at time t i j . We assume that Z is a completely observed time-invariant covariate. g ( . ) represents a link function (eg, the logit function).
L95: Broadly, the methods in this article cover the 3 scenarios described in Table 1 . To illustrate the prediction scenarios and methods, we consider a simplified version of the Sequential Organ Failure Assessment score, 21 used to predict mortality in critical care, assuming that the only predictors in the model are bilirubin and blood pressure. Of these 2 predictors, we assume that blood pressure is completely observed for all patients, and that bilirubin is informatively observed, as it has been shown to be within critical care. Depending on the specific scenario, it may be a one-time point observation, or a longitudinal process. 17
L97: [TABLE Table 1.] A description of different prediction scenarios, covering cross-sectional vs longitudinal predictors and outcomes
L99: S1 | Cross-sectional prediction | Interest lies in obtaining a single prognostic estimate (prediction) using a single value for each predictor. | Use values of bilirubin and BP obtained upon ICU admission to predict in-hospital survival (binary).
L100: S2 | Cross-sectional prediction with longitudinal predictor measurements | Interest lies in obtaining a single prognostic estimate but using the longitudinal history of predictor values. | Use all repeated lab tests obtained throughout inpatient admission for bilirubin and BP to predict in-hospital survival.
L101: S3 | Longitudinal prediction with longitudinal predictors and outcomes | Interested in prognostic estimates at multiple time points, potentially using the longitudinal history of predictor values. | Use all repeated measures of BP and bilirubin obtained throughout inpatient and ICU admission to predict survival at multiple future time points.
L111: We identified 3 broad categories of method based on the included articles: (1) methods that incorporate IP or IO through derived predictors; (2) methods for modeling under IP; and (3) methods that incorporate IP or IO using latent structures. Within these 3 categories, we identified 8 modeling strategies. A summary of the methods can be found in Table 2 . Table 3 summarizes the advantages, disadvantages, software, and assumptions for each method—here, the reported advantages and disadvantages were inferred by the research team because they are not consistently mentioned in the included literature. A summary table at article level can be found in Supplementary Appendix 3.
L113: [TABLE Table 2.] Descriptive summary table of methods, detailing when each method may be appropriate and how it would work with the running example of a simplified SOFA score
L115: Missing indicators & Separate class | Derived predictors | 16 , 23–30 | S1 | IP | Creating a binary indicator, representing presence/absence of a predictor at a given time point or in a given window | Create a binary indicator taking 0 when bilirubin is observed, and 1 if missing. Enter this as an additional predictor alongside observed bilirubin and BP.
L116: Summary measures | Derived predictors | 15 , 24 , 31–44 | S2 | IO | Summarizing the observation process into a single variable, eg, counting visits, rates of visits over a window, weighted counts | Count the number of times bilirubin has been measured over the first 24 hours of each ICU admission. Enter this count as an additional predictor in the model.
L117: Pattern-specific models | Modeling under informed presence | 45 , 46 | S1 | IP | Derive separate models for each missingness pattern | Develop models for: bilirubin and BP observed, and only BP observed
L118: Likelihood-based methods | Modeling under informed presence | 47 , 48 | S1 | IP | Incorporating missingness mechanism into maximum-likelihood estimation of parameter estimates | Bilirubin is missing not at random. Estimate model parameters using method-of-weights and EM algorithm.
L119: Similarity measures | Derived predictors | 49 | S2 | IO | Calculate similarity between target patient and all others, based on predictor values and measurement timings. Develop models separately for “similar” groups of patients. | Develop separate models amongst cohorts of patients with similar bilirubin, BP and timings of those measures.
L120: Latent variable | Latent structures | 50 , 51 | S1, S3 | IP | Outcome can be partially latent, and the observation process infers the latent state. | The occurrence of a bilirubin measurement is used to infer patient state in a hierarchical model.
L121: HMMs | Latent structures | 52 , 53 | S3 | IO | Outcome is a partially latent process, and the observation process infers the state at any time. | The intensity of bilirubin measurements over the course of a patient's admission infers their severity at any time point.
L122: Joint modeling/shared random effects | Latent structures | 54–56 | S2, S3 | IP and IO | Model the outcome, predictor and observation processes separately, but join them through random effects shared across the models. | Model the number of times bilirubin is measured throughout the admission as a point process, the repeated measures of bilirubin using a linear mixed model, and the binary outcome using a logistic regression. Link these via at least 1 shared random effect across the models.
L128: [TABLE Table 3.] Summary of (subjective assessments of) advantages, disadvantages, software, and assumptions for each method described in this review
L201: The missing indicator approach 16 , 23–30 handles IP in a straightforward manner, by deriving a binary variable that indicates whether a predictor has been observed at a specific time (IP) or over a defined window of time. The indicators enter the prediction model as a separate predictor alongside other patient and clinical information. For example, if a prediction model requires an entry for bilirubin but this test has not been conducted, then a missing indicator would be included as a predictor with value 1 (or 0 when observed). For categorical variables, a separate “missing” category could instead be created.
L205: [DISPLAY EQUATION] (1) g P [ Y = 1 | X , Z ] = β 0 + β 1 X + β 2 Z + γ R
L209: Similarly, for a categorical predictor x i with k categories, then the missing indicator approach would set x i ∈ { Cat 1 , … , C a t k , Missing } and our model would be
L211: [DISPLAY EQUATION] (2) g P [ Y = 1 | X , Z ] = β 0 + β 1 X + β 2 Z
L213: The previous 2 equations could be combined to consider prediction models with both continuous and categorical predictors. Alternatively, missing indicators and separate classes have been well developed in tree-based prediction algorithms. 28–30
L215: Including a missing indicator or separate class is straightforward and has demonstrated improved predictive performance over models omitting them. 17 However, their inclusion could double the number of candidate predictors for a model. The approach also fails to capture complex representations of the measurement process.
L219: An extension to missing indicators, capable of incorporating both IP and IO, is to derive a summary of the measurement process and include this as a predictor. 15 , 24 , 31–44 Examples include a count of the number of measurements (eg, throughout a critical care admission), 37 weighted counts, 42 combined missing indicators, 31 missingness rates over time, 32 time intervals between measures, 33–35 embedding vectors that represent missing values, 36 or information relating to hospital processes. 38 , 39
L221: In some cases, combined missing indicators and time intervals also alter the relationship between a predictor and outcome. Che et al’s 24 method stipulates that the longer a measure has been missing, the less influence it should have on an individual’s prediction; therefore, the last observed measurement is decayed toward a mean value.
L227: [DISPLAY EQUATION] (3) g P [ Y = 1 | X , Z = β 0 + β 1 X + β 2 Z + γ Q
L229: where X is a summary of X ( t ) deemed to have predictive value (eg, the mean, most recent, or most extreme value). If X ( t ) has never been observed, this should be imputed. Like missing indicators, summary measures are easily derived and implemented in any prediction model using standard software (since they are included as standard predictors). Combining missing indicators into one summary, or implementing a dimension-reduction technique such as Lasso, also overcomes the issue of including multiple missing indicators. However, selecting the most appropriate summary measure for a model requires careful consideration, and will depend on the clinical application. No current guidance exists on how best to choose the most appropriate summary measure. The association between a chosen summary measure and the outcome might lack generalizability where measurement processes vary across locations. 23 , 39 Simple summary measures such as counts may also fail to capture the complex relationship between the observation process and outcome.
L237: The pattern-specific approach 45 , 46 derives separate models for each missingness pattern, generalizing the missing indicator approach. The model corresponding to the observed pattern in a new individual is then used for prediction. For example, in a model with a single partially-observed time-invariant continuous predictor, X we would derive the following submodels:
L243: Where Z is completely observed. Note that formulas 4 and 5 can also be combined by including interaction terms with the missing indicator, illustrating how this approach extends the missing indicator method.
L245: Similar submodels could be derived for categorical and continuous predictors. Saar-Tsechansky and Provost 45 proposed using all available data to train each submodel, whereas Fletcher et al 46 recommended that only individuals in each observed pattern be used in the derivation of that pattern’s submodel (also illustrated by Janssen et al). 60 The latter approach does not require knowledge of the missingness mechanism.
L251: A different approach assumes that missingness in the predictors is nonignorable, and incorporates this into parameter estimates via likelihood-based methods. 47 , 48 The model formulation would take, for example, the same form as equation 2 , with parameter estimates obtained according to estimation procedures detailed in the following examples. Escarela et al 47 assumed a bivariate copula-based probability function for the missing covariates and the missingness mechanism. Kirkham 48 instead applied the “method of weights,” which assumes a parametric model for the missingness mechanism and incorporates this into the maximum likelihood estimation of parameter estimates.
L253: Escarela et al 47 described how their missing not at random model can also be used to impute missing values. However, this does not remove the need to make untestable assumptions on the missing data mechanism.
L259: Patient similarity measures apply a sequencing algorithm to establish the alignment of 2 sequences of patient data (eg, longitudinal EHR data). Sha et al 49 presented a novel similarity measure, which recognizes that the type of tests ordered and the time between tests can be indicative of patient condition. Their metric is therefore based on a distance measure incorporating the type, timings and results of tests and they assume that more intense monitoring indicates a more severe condition.
L261: The sequencing algorithm produces a similarity matrix, defining the similarity between each pair of patients. We do not present the model formulation for this method since there are various approaches to using this matrix in prediction (described by Sharafoddini et al.) 61 One such method defines cohorts of “similar” patients within which to develop separate models. This approach can be viewed as an extension of the pattern submodel approach with longitudinally and irregularly measured predictors, in which the patterns are defined by similar longitudinal sequences.
L267: A simple way of representing a latent clinical condition is to use a single (partially) latent binary variable, representing 1 of 2 states. This approach was used by Coley et al 50 and Hubbard et al 51 in which IP and IO are incorporated by allowing the measurement process to infer a latent patient condition under a hierarchical structure.
L269: Define the partially latent binary outcome Y L ∼ Bern ( η ) representing 1 of 2 patient states, where only 1 state is entirely observed. In Coley et al 50 ’s example, “true” cancer state (aggressive vs indolent) is the outcome, but is only observed for a subset of patients who underwent surgery. We then assume that the value of the outcome can influence the presence of x i within the hierarchical model.
L281: Alaa et al 53 proposed a latent semi-Markov process to capture a patient’s evolving clinical state. The “state” variable, Y L t ∈ { 1 , … , 4 } , ranges from clinical stability to clinical deterioration, where stability (state 1) and deterioration (state 4) are observed states, but intermittent states are latent. Here the model aims to predict eventual clinical deterioration, that is, P [ Y ∞ = 4 ] . The observation process (ie, timings) of X ( t ) is used to infer this clinical state, in which it is assumed that increased monitoring indicates a less stable condition. A marked point process model (in this case a Hawkes process) is adopted to model the rate of patient monitoring, with the marks corresponding to the observed value. IO is captured through state-specific intensity functions for the monitoring frequency as follows:
L283: [DISPLAY EQUATION] (7) λ ( t | Y L ( t ) = 1 ) = λ 1 + α 1 ∑ τ < t m < t e - β 1 t - t m
L287: [DISPLAY EQUATION] (8) λ ( t | Y L ( t ) = 4 ) = λ 4 + α 4 ∑ τ < t m < t e - β 4 t - t m
L295: Joint modeling has been developed extensively within the prediction context, particularly for dynamic prediction, that is, incorporating time-updated variables (S2 in Table 1 ). 62–65 Joint modeling can be extended to handling IP and IO, by linking the outcome to the observation process via a shared random effect, 54–56 which can be seen as an alternative approach to modeling latent variables. Separate models are defined for the outcome occurrence and the observation process, each of them containing an individual-level random effect representing individual “frailty.” By sharing these random effects across the 2 models, the outcome and observation processes are linked. Liang et al 54 and Choi et al 56 both allow for irregularly observed visits, and therefore specify a hazard or intensity function that defines how often visits occur. The random effect, or frailty term, controls how an individual’s visit rate differs from average. As this effect also appears in the model for the outcome, the visit rate indirectly affects the prediction for the outcome.
L297: The method outlined in Zhang et al 55 only allows for scheduled, regular observations. Therefore, rather than specifying a model for the intensity/hazard of visiting, the “observation process” model is a repeated measures logistic regression model, in which the outcome indicates whether an individual provided data at a specific time point.
L303: [DISPLAY EQUATION] (10) g P [ Y = 1 | Z , U , V ] = β 1 Z + β 2 U + β 3 V
L305: [DISPLAY EQUATION] (11) h P R j = 1 | U , V , Z = δ 0 U + V + δ 1 R j - 1 + δ 2 Z
L307: Here, U and V are independent subject-specific random effects, and g . and h ( . ) are link functions. β 2 and δ 1 control the relationships between the longitudinal predictor and the outcome, and the longitudinal predictor and the observation process, respectively. β 3 controls the association between the outcome and the missingness process. Missingness at time t depends on missingness at the previous measurement time.
L313: This study has identified 3 broad categories of approaches to incorporate IP or IO into clinical prediction models: derived predictors, modeling under informed presence, and latent structures. This is a growing area of research, and much of the included literature illustrates that IP and IO can be incorporated into clinical prediction models in a meaningful way. Where missing data and nonrandom visit processes have been seen as a nuisance in effect estimation, a more positive outlook is possible when the goal is prediction. Although methodology allowing CPMs to accommodate IP and IO are emerging, further challenges remain, which will be discussed later.
L315: Pullenayegum and Lim 7 and Neuhaus et al 9 have previously reviewed methods for handling IO in studies in which the primary aim is to recover unbiased effect estimates. Both articles assume that the outcome is informatively observed, which differs from the focus of our work in which we assume informatively measured predictors. Phelan et al 5 presented a set of design considerations for EHR-based studies that could help to attenuate issues caused by IP and IO by carefully considering and defining the population of interest (eg, in which part of the care system patient interactions occur) and how health status could affect patient interactions. None of these articles explicitly discuss prediction, in which we anticipate that the most appropriate methods will differ from those for effect estimation.
L317: Empirical studies 37 , 66 have compared methods capable of handling repeatedly measured predictors in CPMs, and many of these methods can be extended to accommodate IO, such as summarizing the process into a single measure (eg, the mean or maximum measurement patterns as predictors) or into more complex latent process methods. Both studies found that joint modeling provided little benefit in predictive performance when compared with simple summary measures, but care should be taken in selecting an appropriate summary measure suited to the clinical context. Bull et al 22 also recommended 3 key considerations when choosing the most suitable method for harnessing a longitudinally measured predictor: the type and amount of information available at prediction time, how the CPM can benefit from the longitudinal information and the validity of assumptions for the particular application. We expect that these considerations will also be relevant to selecting the most appropriate means of incorporating IO.
L331: A second challenge described by Alaa et al 53 concerns models that use the observation process to inform predictions, but also update predictions as new information becomes available. An issue arises when clinicians change their monitoring behavior based on predictions produced by the model; any changes in the way they monitor patients will be fed back into future predictions via the observation process. This should be accounted for to avoid the feedback loop, potentially by developing causal models to account for the possible time-varying confounding, 72 or by explicitly modeling the effects of previous predicted values.
