# Retrieval inventory, NOT completed visual/claim audit
Source L39: TRIPOD+AI statement: updated guidance for reporting clinical prediction models that use regression or machine learning methods; DOI 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378
Original text line numbers. Numbers may be citations, secondary reports,
toy examples, or ambiguous table columns. Verify context before citing.

L19: Prediction models are used across different healthcare settings. They are used to estimate an outcome value or risk. Most models estimate the probability of the presence of a particular health condition (diagnostic) or whether a particular outcome will occur in the future (prognostic). 1 Their primary use is to support clinical decision making, such as whether to refer patients for further testing, monitor disease deterioration or treatment effects, or initiate treatment or lifestyle changes. Examples of well known prediction models include EuroSCORE II (cardiac surgery), 2 the Gail model (breast cancer), 3 the Framingham risk score (cardiovascular disease), 4 IMPACT (traumatic brain injury), 5 and FRAX (osteoporotic and hip fractures). 6
L21: Prediction models are abundant in the biomedical literature, with thousands of models published annually (and increasing), and have been developed for many outcomes and health conditions. 7 8 At least 731 diagnostic and prognostic prediction model studies on covid-19 were published during the first 12 months of the pandemic. 9 Despite this interest in developing prediction models, there have been longstanding concerns about transparency and completeness of reporting in the field, 10 11 and the resulting usability. For readers (including peer reviewers, editors, health professionals, regulators, patients, and the general public), incomplete or inaccurate reporting impairs the ability to critically appraise the study design and methods, have confidence in the findings, and further evaluate or implement a prediction model. Poor reporting of a model might also mask flaws in the design, data collection, or conduct of a study that, if the model was implemented in the clinical pathway, could cause harm. Harm can be perceived to occur when insufficient measures are in place to mitigate bias. Better reporting can create more trust and influence patient and public acceptability of the use of prediction models in healthcare. Authors have an ethical and scientific obligation to honestly report their research in a complete and transparent manner. As noted by the late Doug Altman and colleagues, “Good reporting is not an optional extra; it is an essential component of research” 12 —anything less is little more than avoidable research waste. 13
L23: In response to concerns about incomplete reporting, 10 11 14 15 the TRIPOD (Transparent Reporting of a multivariable model for Individual Prognosis Or Diagnosis) statement was published in 2015 (TRIPOD 2015) to provide minimum reporting recommendations. 16 17 TRIPOD 2015 comprises a checklist of 37 items, which includes 25 items to report in both development and validation studies, and an additional six items for model development studies and six items for validation studies. Accompanying the checklist is an explanation and elaboration document that provides the rationale behind each reporting item; published examples of good reporting; and a discussion of issues relating to the design, conduct, and analysis of prediction model studies. 17 TRIPOD 2015 mainly focused on models developed using regression modelling, which was the prevailing approach at the time. Additional guidance has since been created for reporting abstracts of prediction model studies (TRIPOD for Abstracts 18 ), studies developing or validating prediction models using clustered data (TRIPOD-Cluster 19 20 ), systematic reviews and meta-analyses of prediction model studies (TRIPOD-SRMA 21 ), and guidance in preparation for study protocols (TRIPOD-P 22 ). All available guidance, as well as template checklists for filling out separately, can also be found on the TRIPOD website ( https://www.tripod-statement.org/ ).
L25: Since the publication of TRIPOD 2015, there have been numerous methodological advances in prediction modelling, including sample size guidance for developing models 23 24 25 26 27 and evaluating their performance, 28 29 30 31 32 and greater recognition of operationalising fairness, 33 reproducibility, 34 and adopting open science principles. 35 However, interest and financial investment in applying methods ascribed to artificial intelligence (AI), typically powered by advances in machine learning methods (eg, random forests, deep learning), is where we have seen the most progress and change. With increasing access to data and availability of off-the-shelf software to apply machine learning methods, developing a prediction model has become faster and easier. Vast numbers of prediction models are now entering the scientific literature for many clinical settings, and for a wide range of outcomes and health conditions, with multiple models often available for the same outcome, health condition, and target population. 7 8 36 The ability to critically evaluate the quality of prediction models and understand their ability to serve well in a particular setting or for a particular use case is therefore of even greater critical importance. This ability is predicated on complete and transparent reporting.
L27: However, systematic reviews evaluating studies of prediction models have shown that they are often poorly conducted (including deficiencies in study design or data collection 37 38 ); use poor methodology 37 38 ; are incompletely reported with key details missing 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 ; are consequently at high risk of bias 41 49 55 56 57 ; rarely adhere to open science practices, 58 and are susceptible to overinterpretation or so-called spin. 59 60 These deficiencies cast considerable doubt on models’ usefulness and safety, and raises concerns about their potential to create or widen healthcare disparities. 61 While TRIPOD 2015 is largely agnostic to the type of modelling approach, and much of its reporting recommendations apply equally to non-regression approaches, additional reporting considerations are needed for the growing class of machine learning methods. For example, unlike regression based models, the flexibility and complexity underpinning other machine learning approaches typically means that the resulting prediction models do not result in a simple equation and sometimes even the predictors used remain unclear. Additional reporting considerations are therefore needed that are not currently covered in TRIPOD 2015. Alongside methodological advancements, considerations of fairness, 62 wider acceptance of open science practices, 63 and public and patient involvement in research and implementation of research, 64 65 an update to the TRIPOD 2015 statement is needed to capture these developments and the consequences for reporting.
L29: The aim of this paper is to describe the development of the updated TRIPOD guidance, present the new TRIPOD+AI checklist, and discuss how to use it. TRIPOD+AI aims to harmonise the landscape of prediction model studies and provide guidance regardless of whether regression models or machine learning methods have been used. 66 The “+” in TRIPOD+AI indicates that it provides consolidated reporting recommendations for studies of prediction models developed using regression modelling or machine learning (ie, deep learning, random forests) approaches. We also use the additional term “AI” to be consistent with existing reporting guidelines for studies broadly labelled as involving AI. However, for readability, this article will refer to the methods underpinning them as machine learning ( table 1 ). A glossary of terms ( box 1 ) clarifies key concepts used within the TRIPOD+AI reporting guideline.
L31: [TABLE Table 1] Reporting guidelines for healthcare studies using machine learning
L33: STARD-AI | Studies evaluating the diagnostic accuracy of an artificial intelligence based test (in preparation) 67
L35: CLAIM | Medical imaging studies using artificial intelligence 68
L36: DECIDE-AI | Early stage clinical evaluation (including safety, human factors evaluation) of decision support systems driven by artificial intelligence 69
L37: CHEERS-AI | Studies describing health economic evaluations to estimate the value for money (cost effectiveness) of artificial intelligence interventions 70
L38: SPIRIT-AI | Protocols for clinical trials evaluating an intervention with an artificial intelligence component 71
L39: CONSORT-AI | Clinical trial reports evaluating an intervention with an artificial intelligence component 72
L40: PRISMA-AI | Systematic reviews and meta-analyses of artificial intelligence interventions (in preparation) 73
L96: Evaluating predictive accuracy of a model by estimating model discrimination (eg, c statistic), model calibration (eg, calibration plot, calibration slope), and clinical utility (eg, decision curve analysis). This process is referred to as evaluating a prediction model. 74 75
L130: We describe the development of the TRIPOD+AI statement, a guideline to aid the reporting of studies developing prediction models for diagnosis or prognosis using machine learning or regression methods or evaluating (validating) their performance. There is no such thing as a validated prediction model. 76 To avoid ambiguity and harmonise terminology, we refer to validation as evaluation 74 in this article ( box 1 ). Existing reporting guidelines and those in development for reporting other types of biomedical studies involving a machine learning component are detailed in table 1 . Literature reviews and consensus exercises were used to develop the TRIPOD+AI checklist as recommended by the EQUATOR Network. 77 A steering group was convened by GSC and KGMM to oversee the guideline development process, with members selected to cover a broad range of expertise and experience (comprising GSC, KGMM, RDR, ALB, JBR, BVC, XL, and PD).
L160: The second round of the Delphi was conducted between 16 December 2021 and 17 January 2022. All participants who completed the first Delphi round were invited to the second Delphi round. Additional participants who did not respond to round 1 were reinvited, as were participants identified or recommended after round 1. Invitations for round 2 were sent to 395 people, of whom 200 completed the survey, including 15 who provided partial responses. Survey participants came from 27 different countries, again predominantly the UK (n=70), US (n=37), Netherlands (n=19), and Canada (n=19), and represented six continents (Europe: 123, South America: 3, North America: 56, Australasia: 7, Asia: 10, Africa: 1). Participants reported their primary fields of research/work and could select more than one field: statistics and data science (n=78), AI or machine learning (n=72), clinical (n=49) or epidemiology (n=51), prediction (n=19), radiology (n=26), health policy (n=12), biomedical research (n=14), journal editor (n=13), meta-research/reporting (n=6), biomedical engineering (n=5), funder (n=2), genetics/genomics (n=4), patient representative/engagement (n=3), health economics (n=2), and ethics (n=1).
L164: In round 1 of the modified Delphi, participants rated 65 initial candidate items generated from literature reviews and other reporting checklists, as described above. Agreement was considered when the individuals agreed an item was desirable or essential for inclusion. As defined in the protocol, 79 items with agreement of 70% or higher were carried over to round 2. Items that had an agreement rate lower than 70% were excluded, merged, or rephrased to be presented to panellists for revaluation. These modifications were based on or inspired by the hundreds of comments added by panellists.
L166: In round 2, survey participants were given a link to the aggregated ratings from round 1 ( https://osf.io/zyacb/ ; supplementary table 3). In round 2, participants rated 59 candidate items, covering the title (one item), abstract (one item), introduction (four items), methods (32 items), results (11 items), discussion (eight items), and other (two items). The item relating to patient and public involvement received 69% agreement for inclusion (supplementary table 4). Despite falling just below the 70% threshold, the steering group agreed to retain this item for discussion during the consensus meeting.
L170: An online meeting was held on 8 April 2022 with nine members of the Health Data Research UK’s group for patient and public involvement and engagement (PPIE) ( https://www.hdruk.ac.uk/about-us/involving-and-engaging-patients-and-the-public/ ), chaired by Sophie Staniszewska ( University of Warwick, UK). This meeting was not planned in the study protocol and was the only deviation from the published protocol. 79 Before the meeting, the PPIE group was sent a summary of the TRIPOD+AI project (available at https://osf.io/zyacb/ ), including an executive summary drafted by one member of PPIE group, and the draft checklist. At the meeting, GSC presented details of the TRIPOD+AI initiative, the project status, and draft guidance resulting from round 2 of the Delphi survey. Participants then asked questions and discussed the project aims and scope. Following feedback received at the PPI meeting, and through correspondence written after the meeting, the draft checklist was revised to improve clarity. Three members of the PPI group were invited and two subsequently attended the online consensus meeting with the wider group of stakeholders on 5 July 2022. The manuscript was circulated to the three PPI members for their input and approval.
L176: Before the meeting, invited participants were emailed a document (available at https://osf.io/zyacb/ ) containing a brief overview of TRIPOD+AI, the consensus meeting format and instructions, a summary of the aggregated responses from round 2 of the Delphi survey (supplementary table 3), and the draft TRIPOD+AI checklist. The checklist circulated to the consensus meeting participants included 59 items covering: title (one item), abstract (one item), introduction (four items), methods (32 items), results (11 items), discussion (eight items), and other (two items).
L182: TRIPOD+AI comprises a checklist of items that are considered essential for good reporting of studies developing or evaluating (validating) a prediction model using any statistical or machine learning methods ( table 2 ). Box 2 summarises noteworthy additions and changes to TRIPOD 2015. The TRIPOD+AI checklist comprises 27 main items about the title (item 1), abstract (item 2), introduction (items 3 and 4), methods (items 5-17), open science practises (item 18), patient and public involvement (item 19), results (items 20-24), and discussion (items 25-27). Some items included multiple subitems, totalling to 52 checklist subitems.
L184: [TABLE Table 2] TRIPOD+AI checklist for the reporting of prediction model studies
L187: Title | 1 | D;E | Identify the study as developing or evaluating the performance of a multivariable prediction model, the target population, and the outcome to be predicted
L189: Abstract | 2 | D;E | See TRIPOD+AI for Abstracts checklist
L191: Background | 3a | D;E | Explain the healthcare context (including whether diagnostic or prognostic) and rationale for developing or evaluating the prediction model, including references to existing models
L192: 3b | D;E | Describe the target population and the intended purpose of the prediction model in the context of the care pathway, including its intended users (eg, healthcare professionals, patients, public)
L193: 3c | D;E | Describe any known health inequalities between sociodemographic groups
L194: Objectives | 4 | D;E | Specify the study objectives, including whether the study describes the development or validation of a prediction model (or both)
L196: Data | 5a | D;E | Describe the sources of data separately for the development and evaluation datasets (eg, randomised trial, cohort, routine care or registry data), the rationale for using these data, and representativeness of the data
L197: 5b | D;E | Specify the dates of the collected participant data, including start and end of participant accrual; and, if applicable, end of follow-up
L198: Participants | 6a | D;E | Specify key elements of the study setting (eg, primary care, secondary care, general population) including the number and location of centres
L199: 6b | D;E | Describe the eligibility criteria for study participants
L200: 6c | D;E | Give details of any treatments received, and how they were handled during model development or evaluation, if relevant
L201: Data preparation | 7 | D;E | Describe any data pre-processing and quality checking, including whether this was similar across relevant sociodemographic groups
L202: Outcome | 8a | D;E | Clearly define the outcome that is being predicted and the time horizon, including how and when assessed, the rationale for choosing this outcome, and whether the method of outcome assessment is consistent across sociodemographic groups
L203: 8b | D;E | If outcome assessment requires subjective interpretation, describe the qualifications and demographic characteristics of the outcome assessors
L204: 8c | D;E | Report any actions to blind assessment of the outcome to be predicted
L205: Predictors | 9a | D | Describe the choice of initial predictors (eg, literature, previous models, all available predictors) and any pre-selection of predictors before model building
L206: 9b | D;E | Clearly define all predictors, including how and when they were measured (and any actions to blind assessment of predictors for the outcome and other predictors)
L207: 9c | D;E | If predictor measurement requires subjective interpretation, describe the qualifications and demographic characteristics of the predictor assessors
L208: Sample size | 10 | D;E | Explain how the study size was arrived at (separately for development and evaluation), and justify that the study size was sufficient to answer the research question. Include details of any sample size calculation
L209: Missing data | 11 | D;E | Describe how missing data were handled. Provide reasons for omitting any data
L210: Analytical methods | 12a | D | Describe how the data were used (eg, for development and evaluation of model performance) in the analysis, including whether the data were partitioned, considering any sample size requirements
L211: 12b | D | Depending on the type of model, describe how predictors were handled in the analyses (functional form, rescaling, transformation, or any standardisation)
L212: 12c | D | Specify the type of model, rationale†, all model building steps, including any hyperparameter tuning, and method for internal validation
L213: 12d | D;E | Describe if and how any heterogeneity in estimates of model parameter values and model performance was handled and quantified across clusters (eg, hospitals, countries). See TRIPOD-Cluster for additional considerations‡
L214: 12e | D;E | Specify all measures and plots used (and their rationale) to evaluate model performance (eg, discrimination, calibration, clinical utility) and, if relevant, to compare multiple models
L215: 12f | E | Describe any model updating (eg, recalibration) arising from the model evaluation, either overall or for particular sociodemographic groups or settings
L216: 12g | E | For model evaluation, describe how the model predictions were calculated (eg, formula, code, object, application programming interface)
L217: Class imbalance | 13 | D;E | If class imbalance methods were used, state why and how this was done, and any subsequent methods to recalibrate the model or the model predictions
L218: Fairness | 14 | D;E | Describe any approaches that were used to address model fairness and their rationale
L219: Model output | 15 | D | Specify the output of the prediction model (eg, probabilities, classification). Provide details and rationale for any classification and how the thresholds were identified
L220: Training versus evaluation | 16 | D;E | Identify any differences between the development and evaluation data in healthcare setting, eligibility criteria, outcome, and predictors
L221: Ethical approval | 17 | D;E | Name the institutional research board or ethics committee that approved the study and describe the participant informed consent or the ethics committee waiver of informed consent
L223: Funding | 18a | D;E | Give the source of funding and the role of the funders for the present study
L224: Conflicts of interest | 18b | D;E | Declare any conflicts of interest and financial disclosures for all authors
L225: Protocol | 18c | D;E | Indicate where the study protocol can be accessed or state that a protocol was not prepared
L226: Registration | 18d | D;E | Provide registration information for the study, including register name and registration number, or state that the study was not registered
L227: Data sharing | 18e | D;E | Provide details of the availability of the study data
L228: Code sharing | 18f | D;E | Provide details of the availability of the analytical code§
L230: Patient and public involvement | 19 | D;E | Provide details of any patient and public involvement during the design, conduct, reporting, interpretation, or dissemination of the study or state no involvement
L232: Participants | 20a | D;E | Describe the flow of participants through the study, including the number of participants with and without the outcome and, if applicable, a summary of the follow-up time. A diagram may be helpful
L233: 20b | D;E | Report the characteristics overall and, where applicable, for each data source or setting, including the key dates, key predictors (including demographics), treatments received, sample size, number of outcome events, follow-up time, and amount of missing data. A table may be helpful. Report any differences across key demographic groups
L234: 20c | E | For model evaluation, show a comparison with the development data of the distribution of important predictors (demographics, predictors, and outcome)
L235: Model development | 21 | D;E | Specify the number of participants and outcome events in each analysis (eg, for model development, hyperparameter tuning, model evaluation)
L236: Model specification | 22 | D | Provide details of the full prediction model (eg, formula, code, object, application programming interface) to allow predictions in new individuals and to enable third party evaluation and implementation, including any restrictions to access or reuse (eg, freely available, proprietary)¶
L237: Model performance | 23a | D;E | Report model performance estimates with confidence intervals, including for any key subgroups (eg, sociodemographic). Consider plots to aid presentation
L238: 23b | D;E | If examined, report results of any heterogeneity in model performance across clusters. See TRIPOD-Cluster for additional details‡
L239: Model updating | 24 | E | Report the results from any model updating, including the updated model and subsequent performance
L241: Interpretation | 25 | D;E | Give an overall interpretation of the main results, including issues of fairness in the context of the objectives and previous studies
L242: Limitations | 26 | D;E | Discuss any limitations of the study (such as a non-representative sample, sample size, overfitting, missing data) and their effects on any biases, statistical uncertainty, and generalisability
L243: Usability of the model in the context of current care | 27a | D | Describe how poor quality or unavailable input data (eg, predictor values) should be assessed and handled when implementing the prediction model
L244: 27b | D | Specify whether users will be required to interact in the handling of the input data or use of the model, and what level of expertise is required of users
L245: 27c | D;E | Discuss any next steps for future research, with a specific view to applicability and generalisability of the model
L255: TRIPOD-Cluster is a checklist of reporting recommendations for studies developing or validating models that explicitly account for clustering or explore heterogeneity in model performance (eg, at different hospitals or centres). 19 20
L279: TRIPOD+AI covers studies that describe the development of a prediction model, the evaluation (validation) of prediction model performance, or both. Any items denoted D;E apply to all studies regardless of whether they are developing a prediction model or evaluating the performance of a prediction model ( table 2 ). Items in the checklist denoted D apply to studies that describe the development of a prediction model, while items denoted E apply to studies that evaluate the performance of a prediction model. For studies both developing and evaluating the performance of a prediction model, all checklist items apply.
L281: A separate checklist for journal or conference abstracts of prediction model studies is included in TRIPOD+AI. This checklist updates the TRIPOD for Abstracts statement, 18 reflecting new content and maintaining consistency with TRIPOD+AI ( table 3 ).
L283: [TABLE Table 3] Essential items to include for the reporting of prediction model studies in a journal or conference abstract (TRIPOD+AI for Abstracts*)
L286: 1 | Identify the study as developing or evaluating the performance of a multivariable prediction model, the target population, and the outcome to be predicted
L288: 2 | Provide a brief explanation of the healthcare context and rationale for developing or evaluating the performance of all models
L290: 3 | Specify the study objectives, including whether the study describes model development, evaluation, or both
L292: 4 | Describe the sources of data
L293: 5 | Describe the eligibility criteria and setting where the data were collected
L294: 6 | Specify the outcome to be predicted by the model, including time horizon of predictions in case of prognostic models
L295: 7 | Specify the type of model, a summary of the model-building steps, and the method for internal validation†
L296: 8 | Specify the measures used to assess model performance (eg, discrimination, calibration, clinical utility)
L298: 9 | Report the number of participants and outcome events
L299: 10 | Summarise the predictors in the final model†
L300: 11 | Report model performance estimates (with confidence intervals)
L302: 12 | Give an overall interpretation of the main results
L304: 13 | Give the registration number and name of the registry or repository
L318: The TRIPOD+AI checklist supersedes the TRIPOD 2015 checklist, which should no longer be used. For prediction model studies that have accounted for clustering (eg, multiple hospitals, multiple datasets), authors should consult TRIPOD-Cluster for additional reporting recommendations. 19 20 The 2015 explanation and elaboration document remains an important document to provide background and examples for most of the TRIPOD+AI reporting items 17 (because many items have not changed or have been minimally changed), while we produce a detailed and updated document for TRIPOD+AI. We recommend using TRIPOD+AI early in the writing process to ensure that all key details are addressed and reported. An expanded checklist in a bullet point structure has been developed (supplementary table 1) to facilitate implementation of TRIPOD+AI by providing a brief rationale and guidance for each item in the checklist.
L324: We recommend that authors submit a completed checklist indicating the page or line where each requested item can be found, to help the editorial and peer review process. A template for the TRIPOD+AI checklist for filling out separately can be found in supplementary table 2 and is available to download from www.tripod-statement.org .
L334: TRIPOD+AI emphasises fairness issues throughout the checklist, which was lacking or not explicitly stated in TRIPOD 2015. 33 Fairness in prediction model research is particularly important in healthcare, which has gained prominence with AI and machine learning methods being used to develop models to assist in decision making. Fairness in this context means that prediction models are designed and used in a way that does not adversely discriminate against any particular group of individuals and does not create or exacerbate (and ideally mitigates or reduces) existing inequalities in healthcare provision or patient outcomes. 92 One important aspect of fairness is ensuring that the data used to develop or evaluate prediction models are representative and diverse, and that limitations of data bias are acknowledged, dealt with, and mitigated during model development. The STANDING Together initiative is in the process of developing standards for data diversity, inclusivity, and generalisability to tackle bias in AI health datasets. 62
L338: While adequate representation of minoritised and underserved groups within datasets is one key element to achieving fairness goals, representation alone does not guarantee fairness. 61 93 Therefore, TRIPOD+AI has embedded items on fairness throughout, including in the background (item 3c), methods (items 5a, 7, 8a, 8b, 9c, 12f, 14), results (items 20b, 23a), and discussion (items 25, 26).
L340: Fairness in healthcare also means involving diverse stakeholders, including patients, the general public, and clinicians, in the development, evaluation, implementation, and deployment of a prediction model into the clinical pathway. 94 Involving a variety of perspectives will help to ensure that the prediction model is, in principle, designed to meet the needs of all individuals and is used in a way that is fair and equitable, promoting health equity. TRIPOD+AI includes item 19 on public and patient involvement to incentivise the integration of patient involvement in prediction model studies beyond a mere tick box exercise, to encourage and promote the principles of open science and engagement, and to ensure better clinical and public acceptability of the work.
L342: TRIPOD+AI prominently features open science practices. 35 Open science practices are crucial for prediction model research in healthcare as they promote transparency, reproducibility, and collaboration between researchers. 95 By registering research and making study materials such as protocols, data, code, and the prediction model open available, other researchers can verify the findings and evaluate model performance in new data to ensure that models are accurate, and evaluate models for safety. Open science practices also enable researchers to build on each other’s work, leading to more efficient progress in healthcare. These practices can have a considerable impact on patient outcomes by improving the accuracy, integrity, and reliability of prediction models. If data are openly shared, clinicians and researchers can develop or evaluate models on larger and more diverse sets of patient data, 96 potentially leading to more accurate predictions and better informed decisions for patient healthcare. Therefore, TRIPOD+AI includes a section on open science, covering issues such as funding declarations (item 18a), conflicts of interest (18b), protocol availability (18c), study registration (18d), data sharing (18e), and code sharing (18f).
L344: We anticipate that the key users and beneficiaries of TRIPOD+AI will be researchers writing papers, journal editors and peer reviewers who evaluate research papers, and other stakeholders (eg, academic institutions, policy makers, funders, regulators, patients, study participants, and the broader public) who will benefit from the increased quality of prediction model research ( table 4 ). The guideline is relevant for any reports related to clinical prediction model development and validation studies, including medical research articles and other areas where evidenced reports are needed, for example, to accompany software and tools.
L346: [TABLE Table 4] Adherence to the TRIPOD+AI reporting guideline: potential benefits from stakeholders’ actions
L386: TRIPOD+AI working group/consensus meeting participants: Gary Collins (University of Oxford, UK), Karel Moons (UMC Utrecht, Netherlands), Johannes Reitsma (UMC Utrecht, Netherlands), Andrew Beam (Harvard School of Public Health, USA), Ben Van Calster (KU Leuven, Belgium), Paula Dhiman (University of Oxford, UK), Richard Riley (University of Birmingham, UK), Marzyeh Ghassemi (Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA), Patricia Logullo (University of Oxford, UK), Maarten van Smeden (UMC Utrecht, Netherlands), Jennifer Catherine Camaradou (Health Data Research (HDR) UK public and patient involvement group, NHS England Accelerated Access Collaborative evaluation advisory group member, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence covid-19 expert panel), Richard Parnell (HDR UK public and patient involvement group), Elizabeth Loder ( The BMJ ), Robert Golub (Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, USA ( JAMA , at the time of the consensus meeting)), Naomi Lee (National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, UK; The Lancet , at the time of consensus meeting), Johan Ordish (Roche, UK; Medicine and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency, UK at the time of consensus meeting), Laure Wynants (KU Leuven, Belgium), Leo Celi (Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA), Bilal Mateen (Wellcome Trust, UK), Alastair Denniston (University of Birmingham, UK), Karandeep Singh (University of Michigan, USA), Georg Heinze (Medical University of Vienna, Austria), Lauren Oaken-Rayner (University of Adelaide, Australia), Melissa McCradden (Hospital for Sick Children, Canada), Hugh Harvey (Hardian Health, UK), Andre Pascal Kengne (University of Cape Town, South Africa), Viknesh Sounderajah (Imperial College London, UK), Lena Maier-Hein (German Cancer Research Centre, Germany), Anne-Laure Boulesteix (University of Munich, Germany), Xiaoxuan Liu (University of Birmingham, UK), Emily Lam (HDR UK public and patient involvement group), Ben Glocker (Imperial College London, UK), Sherri Rose (Stanford University, US), Michael Hoffman (University of Toronto, Canada), and Spiros Denaxas (University College London, UK). The last seven participants in this list did not attend the virtual consensus meeting.
L394: Supplementary table 1: TRIPOD+AI Expanded Checklist (Explanation and Elaboration Light)
L396: Supplementary table 2: Fillable TRIPOD+AI checklist
L398: Supplementary table 3: Aggregated TRIPOD+AI responses from Delphi round 1
L400: Supplementary table 4: Aggregated TRIPOD+AI responses from Delphi round 2
L406: Competing interests: All authors have completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form at https://www.icmje.org/disclosure-of-interest/ and declare: support from the funding bodies listed above for the submitted work; no financial relationships with any organisations that might have an interest in the submitted work in the previous three years; no other relationships or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work. GSC is a National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR) senior investigator, the director of the UK EQUATOR Centre, editor-in-chief of BMC Diagnostic and Prognostic Research , and a statistics editor for The BMJ . KGMM is director of Health Innovation Netherlands and editor-in-chief of BMC Diagnostic and Prognostic Research . RDR is an NIHR senior investigator, a statistics editor for The BMJ , and receives royalties from textbooks Prognosis Research in Healthcare and Individual Participant Data Meta-Analysis . AKD is an NIHR senior investigator. EWL is the head of research at The BMJ . BG is a part time employee of HeartFlow and Kheiron Medical Technologies and holds stock options with both as part of the standard compensation package. SR receives royalties from Springer for the textbooks Targeted Learning: Causal Inference for Observational and Experimental Data and Targeted Learning: Causal Inference for Complex Longitudinal Studies . JCC receives honorariums as a current lay member on the UK NICE covid-19 expert panel and a citizen partner on the COVID-END Covid-19 Evidence Network to support decision making; was a lay member on the UK NIHR AI AWARD panel in 2020-22 and is a current lay member on the UK NHS England AAC Accelerated Access Collaborative NHS AI Laboratory Evaluation Advisory Group; is a patient fellow of the European Patients’ Academy on Therapeutic Innovation and a EURORDIS rare disease alumni; reports grants from the UK National Institute for Health and Care Research, European Commission, UK Cell Gene Catapult, University College London, and University of East Anglia; reports patient speaker fees from MEDABLE, Reuters Pharma events, Patients as Partners Europe, and EIT Health Scandinavia; reports consultancy fees from Roche Global, GlaxoSmithKline, the FutureScience Group and Springer Healthcare (scientific publishing), outside of the scope of the present work; and is a strategic board member of the UK Medical Research Council IASB Advanced Pain Discovery Platform initiative, Plymouth Institute of Health, and EU project Digipredict Edge AI-deployed Digital Twins for covid-19 Cardiovascular Disease. ALB is a paid consultant for Generate Biomedicines, Flagship Pioneering, Porter Health, FL97, Tessera, FL85; has an equity stake in Generate Biomedicines; and receives research funding support from GlaxoSmithKline, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, and National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. No other conflicts of interests with this specific work are declared.
L420: Supplementary table 1: TRIPOD+AI Expanded Checklist (Explanation and Elaboration Light)
L422: Supplementary table 2: Fillable TRIPOD+AI checklist
L424: Supplementary table 3: Aggregated TRIPOD+AI responses from Delphi round 1
L426: Supplementary table 4: Aggregated TRIPOD+AI responses from Delphi round 2
