SOURCE ID: L06
TITLE: Propensity-based standardization to enhance the validation and interpretation of prediction model discrimination for a target population
YEAR: 2023
DOI: 10.1002/sim.9817
PDF: ../pdfs/L06.pdf
PAGES: 22
EXTRACTION: pdftotext -layout. Page breaks are form feeds. Check equations, tables, and figures against the PDF during visual audit.
==============================================================================

                       Utrecht University Repository

Title                  Propensity-based standardization to enhance the validation and interpretation
                       of prediction model discrimination for a target population


Authors                de Jong, Valentijn M.T.; Hoogland, Jeroen; Moons, Karel G.M.; Riley,Richard D.;
                       Nguyen,Tri Long; Debray, Thomas P.A.


Published in           Statistics in Medicine


Publication Date       2023-08-30


Link                   http://hdl.handle.net/1874/449595


Citation               de Jong, V M T, Hoogland, J, Moons, K G M, Riley, R D, Nguyen, T L & Debray,
                       T P A 2023, 'Propensity-based standardization to enhance the validation and
                       interpretation of prediction model discrimination for a target population',
                       Statistics in Medicine, vol. 42, no. 19, pp. 3508-3528. https://doi.org/10.1002/
                       sim.9817


Versions / License     Publisher version


Rights                 https://www.uu.nl/en/university-library/license-and-reuse-conditions


Universitair Medisch   Yes
Centrum Utrecht
(UMCU)
Received: 6 May 2021     Revised: 26 February 2023     Accepted: 19 May 2023

DOI: 10.1002/sim.9817


RESEARCH ARTICLE




Propensity-based standardization to enhance the validation
and interpretation of prediction model discrimination for a
target population

Valentijn M. T. de Jong1,2   Jeroen Hoogland1,3  Karel G. M. Moons1
Richard D. Riley4     Tri-Long Nguyen5    Thomas P. A. Debray1,6

1
  Julius Center for Health Sciences and
Primary Care, University Medical Center              External validation of the discriminative ability of prediction models is of key
Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The            importance. However, the interpretation of such evaluations is challenging,
Netherlands
                                                     as the ability to discriminate depends on both the sample characteristics (ie,
2
 Data Analytics and Methods Task Force,
European Medicines Agency, Amsterdam,
                                                     case-mix) and the generalizability of predictor coefficients, but most discrim-
The Netherlands                                      ination indices do not provide any insight into their respective contributions.
3
 Department of Epidemiology and Data                 To disentangle differences in discriminative ability across external validation
Science, Amsterdam University Medical
                                                     samples due to a lack of model generalizability from differences in sample char-
Centers, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
4
                                                     acteristics, we propose propensity-weighted measures of discrimination. These
 Institute of Applied Health Research,
College of Medical and Dental Sciences,              weighted metrics, which are derived from propensity scores for sample member-
University of Birmingham, Birmingham,                ship, are standardized for case-mix differences between the model development
UK
                                                     and validation samples, allowing for a fair comparison of discriminative ability
5
 Section of Epidemiology, Department of
Public Health, Faculty of Health and                 in terms of model characteristics in a target population of interest. We illustrate
Medical Sciences, University of                      our methods with the validation of eight prediction models for deep vein throm-
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
                                                     bosis in 12 external validation data sets and assess our methods in a simulation
6
 Smart Data Analysis and Statistics,
                                                     study. In the illustrative example, propensity score standardization reduced
Utrecht, The Netherlands
                                                     between-study heterogeneity of discrimination, indicating that between-study
Correspondence                                       variability was partially attributable to case-mix. The simulation study showed
Valentijn M. T. de Jong, Julius Center for
Health Sciences and Primary Care,
                                                     that only flexible propensity-score methods (allowing for non-linear effects)
University Medical Center Utrecht, Str.              produced unbiased estimates of model discrimination in the target population,
6.131, P.O. Box 85500, 3508GA Utrecht,               and only when the positivity assumption was met. Propensity score-based stan-
The Netherlands.
Email: Valentijn.M.T.de.Jong@gmail.com               dardization may facilitate the interpretation of (heterogeneity in) discriminative
                                                     ability of a prediction model as observed across multiple studies, and may guide
Funding information
                                                     model updating strategies for a particular target population. Careful propensity
European Commission, Grant/Award
Number: 825746                                       score modeling with attention for non-linear relations is recommended.

                                                     KEYWORDS
                                                     concordance, external validation, prediction model, propensity score, standardization


Valentijn M. T. de Jong and Jeroen Hoogland contributed equally to this study. Tri-Long Nguyen and Thomas P. A. Debray contributed equally to this
study.
Disclaimer: The views expressed in this paper are the personal views of the authors and may not be understood or quoted as being made on behalf of
or reflecting the position of the regulatory agency/agencies or organizations with which the authors are employed/affiliated.
This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not used for commercial purposes.
© 2023 The Authors. Statistics in Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

3508     wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/sim                                                                               Statistics in Medicine. 2023;42:3508–3528.
                                                                                                                                10970258, 2023, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sim.9817 by Cochrane Netherlands, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
JONG et al.                                                                                                              3509




1        I N T RO DU CT ION

Prediction models provide estimates of absolute risk that a particular health status is present (diagnosis) or will occur in
the future (prognosis).1 The development of prediction models has seen a rapid growth in medicine. Unfortunately, many
prediction models perform worse when tested (ie, validated) in or applied to new individuals.2-5 Common reasons for
inaccurate predictions for new individuals are the violation of model assumptions, omission of important predictors, poor
handling of missing data in the development or validation data and, in particular, overfitting of the developed model.6-9
The performance of model predictions may also be affected by the (lack of) representativeness of samples in view of the
target population. For instance, datasets for validation may have differences (compared to the target population) in patient
characteristics (case-mix), in predictor and outcome measurements, and in (the presence of) measurement error, thereby
affecting prediction model performance across validation samples.10-13
    It is widely advocated that when researchers develop a new prediction model, they explore whether its predic-
tions are sufficiently accurate across different validation samples from the target population.14-16 The model’s predictive
performance is therefore assessed in new samples that have not been used during its development (so-called external vali-
dation).10,11,17-20 To facilitate investigation of model performance, researchers developing a novel prediction model ideally
collect individual participant data (IPD) from two or more settings, institutes or even predesigned (validation) studies.16
One (or more) data set can then be used for model development and the remaining studies for external validation pur-
poses. Results from the validation study are then used to confirm whether the model is adequate or to recommend certain
revisions prior to its implementation in practice for (a) particular target population(s). Clearly, the choice of appropriate
data for the purpose of validation is no trivial task. Important characteristics that affect such a decision include sample
size, availability of predictors and outcome, and representativeness of the study population with respect to the target pop-
ulation in which the model will be used. If the validation sample does not fully represent the target population, estimates
of model performance may be misleading. Although it is clearly preferable that a prediction model is validated in a large
and representative sample from the target population, such data are not always available. Nonetheless, validation sets
from populations sufficiently related to the target population may still provide the required information. Therefore, the
question we here consider is how we can use validation data sets that are not fully representative of the target population
of interest for the purpose of prediction model validation.
    When pursuing an external validation study that is not fully representative of the target population, changes in model
performance with respect to the development study should be interpreted with caution. Decline in a prediction model
performance measure does not necessarily imply that the model coefficients (eg, predictor weights) are not generaliz-
able to the target population. In particular, discriminative ability may drop if the validation sample is considerably more
homogeneous than the development sample, even if the model generalizes well:21 it is simply more difficult to discrimi-
nate amongst participants that are similar to each other. Likewise, adequate performance upon external validation does
not necessarily imply that the model transports well to the target population, as this requires some degree of consistent
model performance across multiple validation samples with different case-mix which may not have been fully reflected in
the external validation data at hand.10,11 The interpretation of prediction model performance becomes particularly chal-
lenging in IPD meta-analysis, where studies may differ in eligibility criteria, measurement methods and so forth. The
presence of between-study heterogeneity is a common concern in meta-analysis of prediction model performance, and
obfuscates to what extent the model is actually generalizable.
    To disentangle the possible sources of variability in prediction model performance across multiple validation studies, it
has been recommended to quantify the relatedness between the development and validation samples.3 This allows for the
isolation of changes in performance that can only be attributed to the use of regression coefficients that lack transporta-
bility, thereby guiding which type of model revisions may be necessary. An alternative approach that has been suggested
is the model-based concordance measure, which can be used to quantify of the effect of case-mix on discriminative
ability.22,23
    Further, for cases when IPD from both development and validation samples are available, Debray et al proposed to
develop a so-called membership model (not to be confused with the actual prediction model),3 which calculates the prob-
ability that an individual belongs to the development or validation sample. The concordance index of this membership
model reflects the degree of (dis)similarity of the development and validation samples and can be used to identify whether
the evaluation of a particular model’s performance is likely to be affected by case-mix differences.3,4 In this article, we
build on this membership model framework and consider the use of propensity score weighting methods to standard-
ize prediction model concordance measures for a particular target population. These concordance measures may be
                                                                                                                                   10970258, 2023, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sim.9817 by Cochrane Netherlands, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
3510                                                                                                                 JONG et al.



estimated in one or more validation samples from settings and populations that are different from but related to the
intended target population, as well as at least one sample from the intended target population.
     Our proposed weighting methods are derived from well-known epidemiological approaches to standardizing samples
with respect to their covariate distributions.24,25 Such standardization may help researchers to interpret differences in
discriminative ability at external validation (as compared to the development sample or to other validation samples) and
identify the usefulness of specific model updating or revision strategies. This usage of propensity-based standardization
can also be conducted when IPD from multiple samples are readily available, which appears particularly useful in an
individual participant data meta-analysis (IPDMA) or when using a large electronic healthcare database that includes
multiple data sets (clusters) that can be used for model development validations.
     IPDMA and routinely collected clustered healthcare data sets are used increasingly often to develop new predic-
tion models and to assess their performance in external data.26,27 Often, the studies from an IPDMA differ in design
and participant characteristics, and may not always adequately represent the population where the model will eventu-
ally be implemented. It is, for instance, possible that some data sets were obtained from randomized trials, or comprise
patients from earlier time periods. Even though these data sets can still be used to inform prediction model develop-
ment, performance estimates derived from these data sets can be misleading if no effort is made to adjust for their poor
representativeness of the target population.
     We have recently suggested to use propensity scores to assist external validation of clinical prediction models.28,29 This
article explores the untapped value of propensity-based standardization in the validation of clinical prediction models
using IPD from two or more sources (studies or another form of clusters). We aim to provide metrics of discriminative abil-
ity that are adjusted for case-mix variation, and to test statistical properties of this methodology. In Section 2, we present
propensity-based standardization methods in the context of clinical prediction models as well as propensity-standardized
validation measures, in Section 3 we describe a motivating example with illustrative data from multiple studies on the
diagnosis of deep vein thrombosis (DVT), in Section 4 we provide a simulation study to assess the proposed methods, and
finally Section 5 provides a discussion of our results.


2   PROPENSITY S CO RE STANDARDIZATION AND C LINICAL
PREDICTION MODELS

Propensity score methods were initially proposed for the estimation of causal (eg, treatment) effects in non-randomized
data.24 Clinical prediction models typically do not aim to provide a causal explanation30,31 and therefore do not (strictly)
require the incorporation of treatment propensity scores.32 Although it is possible to account for received treatments dur-
ing the development and validation of prediction models,33,34 we propose a different use of propensity score methods. In
particular, when IPD from multiple settings or populations are available to the researcher, one can estimate the probability
that a certain individual is a member of a certain sample. Provided that at least one sample is from the prediction model’s
target population, these propensity scores can then be used to standardize the available samples with respect to that spe-
cific target population. This target population could for instance be captured by a specific data source (eg, the development
sample of the prediction model), or represent an amalgamation of multiple data sources. By adopting propensity-score
methods to standardize the available validation samples, we can facilitate the interpretation of a particular model’s dis-
criminative ability in the intended target population, even when those validation samples do not fully reflect the target
population of interest. In other words, we use propensity scores to make the validation sample(s) exchangeable with a
sample (or multiple) from the target population.


2.1       Standardization to membership propensity scores

For individual i, we define the membership propensity score, mSi (j), as the conditional probability of being member of
study sample j, j = 1, … , J:

                                                    mSi (j) = Pr(Si = j|Xi ),                                               (1)

where Si is a random variable denoting the study sample of individual i, and Xi = (X1 , … , XR ) denotes a vector that con-
tains the individual’s values for predictor r, r = 1, … , R. In an analysis of J study samples, we have Si ∈ (1, 2, … , J).
                                                                                                                                  10970258, 2023, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sim.9817 by Cochrane Netherlands, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
JONG et al.                                                                                                                3511



Additionally, let si denote the study sample to which individual i actually belongs, such that the propensity score
mSi (Si = si ) quantifies the conditional probability of individual i being member of its originating sample. Further, in all
                        ∑
cases, by definition, j mSi (j) = 1, for each i. As a result, taking sample J as the reference sample, the propensity score
mSi (j) can be estimated by a multinomial logistic regression model:

                                            ⎧      exp(𝜙j + 𝜸 j Xi )
                                                                ′

                                            ⎪     ∑J−1                                       for j ≠ J,
                                  mSi (j) = ⎨ 1 +( h=1 exp(𝜙h + 𝜸 ′h Xi )    )                                              (2)
                                            ⎪1∕ 1 + ∑J−1 exp(𝜙 + 𝜸 ′ X )                     for j = J,
                                            ⎩          h=1           h   h i


where 𝜸 j = (𝛾j1 , … , 𝛾jR )′ denotes the coefficients for X1 , … , XR in the jth linear predictor. In the presence of only two
study samples, that is, J = 2, Equation (2) reduces to the binary logistic regression model.
    It may be common that the differences between study samples are non-linear (on the scale of the linear predictor) in
nature. For instance, suppose we have multiple observational study samples of participants of all ages and one sample
from a randomized trial that includes only middle-aged adults. A logistic model with a linear term for age would not be
able to discriminate between participants from the trial vs observational studies, as both the high and low values for age
would be indicative for membership of an observational study. To capture this association, a nonlinear term would be
necessary.35 As the true differences between the validation sample and the target population can be highly nonlinear, we
advocate that a flexible modeling approach is used, for instance by the use of spline functions, piecewise polynomials or
artificial neural networks.36 Here, we model:

                                  ⎧              ∑R ∑M
                                  ⎪     exp(𝜙j + r=1 m=1 𝛾jrm frm (Xir ))
                                       ∑J−1    (    ∑R ∑M                    )                        for j ≠ J,
                                  ⎪
                        mSi (j) = ⎨ 1 + h=1 exp 𝜙h + r=1 m=1 𝛾hrm frm (Xir )                                                (3)
                                  ⎪ (     ∑J−1    (    ∑R ∑M                   ))
                                  ⎪1∕ 1 + h=1 exp 𝜙h + r=1 m=1 𝛾hrm frm (Xir )                        for j = J,
                                  ⎩

where frm (.) represents m, m = 1, … , M, non-linear functions. In a way akin to the use of propensity scores for causal
inference,25 the membership propensity score msi (j) can subsequently be used to construct the standardization weight
with respect to sample j:

                                                                      mSi (j)
                                                      wi (j, si ) =               .                                         (4)
                                                                      mSi (si )

    For instance, consider that a prediction model was developed using data from an observational study (sample b) and is
subsequently validated using EHR data from a certain hospital (sample a). Although both the development and validation
sample may contain individuals from the model’s target population, it may occur that the validation sample captures a
population with a wider age range, or that the validation sample contains proportionally fewer children, or any other
subgroup. Then, the (case-mix) diversity of the target population as reflected by the original development sample may
not be well represented by the validation sample. Estimates of prediction model discriminative ability from validation
sample a may therefore be misleading if no account is made for the case-mix differences with respect to sample b from
the target population. For this reason, we can standardize the distribution of sample a with respect to sample b, such
that the weighted validation sample a better represents the target population of sample b. Thereby, this enhances the
interpretation of subsequent discriminative ability estimates from the validation sample. For individuals from sample a,
we assign the following weights:

                                                                         mSi (b)
                                                   wi (b, si = a) =                    .                                    (5)
                                                                         mSi (a)

    Conversely, for individuals from sample b, the weights are defined as:

                                                                      mSi (b)
                                                 wi (b, si = b) =                     = 1.                                  (6)
                                                                      mSi (b)
                                                                                                                                 10970258, 2023, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sim.9817 by Cochrane Netherlands, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
3512                                                                                                               JONG et al.



    These weights are derived from standardization weighting methods described in the causal inference literature,
commonly referred to as “inverse probability weighting” or “standardized mortality ratio” weighting.37,38 (In inverse
probability weighting, the numerator is the propensity of belonging to any of the studied samples; that is, the numerator
       ∑
equals j mSi (j) = 1 instead of mSi (j).)
    We note that this method requires that the sample that is to be standardized fully captures the domain of the
distribution of participant characteristics in the target population with non-zero probability. Propensity score methods
are used to weight observed samples. As such, they can down-weight overrepresented groups and up-weight underrepre-
sented groups. However, if a certain subgroup is not represented in the validation sample (hence violating the positivity
assumption as referred to in the propensity score literature), it cannot be up-weighted.
    Further, the proposed method may also be useful when multiple validation samples are available, and one sample
originates from the target population. The other validation samples can then be standardized with respect to the sample
from the target population.


2.2       Validation of prediction models in standardized samples

After the weights are defined, propensity score methods can be used to standardize the discriminative ability estimates in
external validation samples with respect to the sample of the target population (eg, the original development sample). By
removing the difference in case-mix, this approach may help to interpret estimates of prediction model discrimination in
external validation studies with respect to the original development sample. In other words, prediction model discrimina-
tion is adjusted for differences in case-mix, which may help to identify causes of poor transportability that cannot directly
be attributed to case-mix differences, such as model coefficients that do not generalize to different settings. For instance,
when data from a randomized controlled trial (RCT) are available for validating an existing model that was developed in a
data from an observational study, it may be more difficult to discriminate between trial patients with and without the out-
come due to the stricter inclusion criteria and thus reduced case-mix variability.21,39 The estimated discriminative ability
in the RCT data would then be a biased estimate of the discriminative ability of the model in the model’s intended target
population. Propensity score methods may help to appreciate and even alleviate this issue by standardizing the valida-
tion samples according to the case-mix distribution of the targeted population. Then, any remaining differences (beyond
chance) in discriminative ability estimates across the validation samples can be attributed to reasons other than case-mix
variation. In the cases of our applied example and simulation study, the case-mix distribution of the target population is
represented by the development sample, but does not need to be the case. For instance, in an IPDMA the target popula-
tion may be captured by one or more validation study samples. If the samples (say b, c, and d) of the target population are
truly different, this would require one to define a mixture distribution and to construct the sample for the target popula-
tion by merging individuals from these samples b, c, and d with a weight that is a function of their propensity to belong
to the target population.
    Below, we describe how measures of prediction model concordance can be standardized with respect to differences
in case-mix between samples. We use the original development sample as the target of standardization, such that any
remaining discriminative ability differences between the development and validation sample can be interpreted as a
consequence of model coefficients that do not generalize to the population from which the validation sample is drawn
(and therefore a lack of model transportability).


2.2.1       Standardized concordance statistic
Discrimination can be assessed with the concordance (c)-statistic (or area under the receiver operating curve, AUC). For
a randomly selected patient i+ , i+ ∈ (1, … , N+ ), with the outcome and a randomly selected patient i− , i− ∈ (1, … , N− ),
without the outcome, the c-statistic estimates the probability that patient i+ has the highest predicted probability pi+ of
the outcome. The c-statistic for binary outcomes can be described as:

                                                      1 ∑∑
                                                           N+ N−
                                               c=                 I(pi+ > pi− ),                                          (7)
                                                    N+ N− i =1i =1
                                                           +   −



where I(pi+ > pi− ) is an indicator function that takes the value 1 if pi+ > pi− and 0 in all other cases. Optionally, it may
take the value of 0.5 if pi+ = pi− , such that no excessive penalty is given to ties.
                                                                                                                                                                      10970258, 2023, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sim.9817 by Cochrane Netherlands, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
JONG et al.                                                                                                                                                    3513



    We propose to apply a weighting procedure to the c-statistic, similar to precedents.40,41 We propose to define weights
of concordant pairs according to the pairs’ propensity scores for the target population. Assuming independence between
members of a same pair, the propensity score of a pair is equal to the product of the propensity scores of the members of
the pair. Accordingly, the weight of the pair is equal to the product of the weights of the members of the pair. Then, the
standardized c-statistic is given by:

                                                               1 ∑∑
                                                                      N+ N−
                                                          cs =           I(pi+ > pi− )wi+ wi− ,                                                                (8)
                                                               W i =1i =1
                                                                     +     −


           ∑N+ ∑N−
where       i+ =1   i− =1
                            wi+ wi− = W denotes the sum of all weights such that the standardized c-statistic is bounded between
0 and 1. Note that W1 = N 1N when all weights equal 1, and Equation (8) reduces to Equation (7).
                                  +   −
    Alternatively, the standardized c-statistic may be obtained by the bootstrap. The individuals of the validation sample
are then sampled with replacement with probability equal to their respective weights (rescaled to range from 0 to 1)
and the (unstandardized) c-statistic is estimated on the resulting samples. The center and percentiles of the resulting
propensity weighted distribution of c-statistics then estimate the standardized c-statistic and its confidence interval,
respectively, similar to the percentile method for the bootstrap estimation of the unstandardized confidence interval.42
    The R code for estimating the weighted concordance is available as an R package on Github (https://github.com/
VMTdeJong/wAUC). In the next section, we present an applied example, in which we estimate the standardized
concordance metric for existing models at multiple external validations.


3          APPLIED EXAMPLE: DIAG NOSIS O F D EEP VEIN THRO MBOSIS

DVT increases a patient’s risk of post-thrombotic syndrome and pulmonary embolism, which can be fatal.43 In DVT
suspected patients, often no DVT is present on advanced reference testing.44 We here consider for illustrative purposes
the development and validation of eight different prediction models that could help in the diagnosis of DVT in patients
that are suspected of having DVT and use the IPD of 10 002 patients, of whom 1864 had DVT, from thirteen different
cross-sectional diagnostic studies across multiple countries.45 In this example, the prediction model was developed on
a sample from the intended target population, as is generally recommended.14 Conversely, samples used for external
validation are more often convenience samples: samples that have much in common with the target population but do not
fully reflect it and happen to be available. In this example, the development and validation samples had similar participant
characteristics on average (Table 1). For instance, in the development data 22% of the participants had DVT, whereas 18%
of the participants did in the pooled validation samples. However, there was major heterogeneity across the validation


T A B L E 1 Clinical characteristics of development and validation data for a model for diagnosing DVT.
                                            Development                                       Validation
    Variable                                No                           Yes                  No                     Yes                    Min            Max

    DVT                                     1006                         289 (22%)            7132                   1575 (18%)             5%             39%
    D-dimer abnormal                        398                          897 (69%)            3629                   5078 (58%)             39%            82%
    Calf difference > = 3 cm                739                          556 (43%)            6248                   2459 (28%)             15%            43%
    Oral contraceptive (OC)                 1167                         128 (10%)            8166                   541 (6%)               0%             23%
    Male                                    828                          467 (36%)            5327                   3380(39%)              33%            48%
    Absence of leg trauma                   197                          1098 (85%)           1587                   7120 (82%)             67%            95%
    Vein distension                         1038                         257 (20%)            7748                   959 (11%)              0%             20%
    Presence of malignancy                  1214                         81 (6%)              7954                   753 (9%)               4%             18%
    Recent surgery or bedridden             1114                         181 (14%)            7777                   930 (11%)              5%             18%

Note: Validation, left: Count (%) for all validation data combined. Validation, right: lowest and highest frequencies of the presence of each respective predictor
in the different validation data sets.
                                                                                                                                                             10970258, 2023, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sim.9817 by Cochrane Netherlands, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
3514                                                                                                                                           JONG et al.


T A B L E 2 Coefficients of eight prediction models for diagnosing DVT.
  Model         Intercept         D-dimer           Calf diff > 3        OC         Male         No trauma            Vein        Malignancy   Surgery

  1             −3.39             2.58
  2             −3.84             2.42              1.11
  3             −3.90             2.44              1.13                 0.40
  4             −4.25             2.46              1.15                 0.72       0.72
  5             −4.87             2.49              1.17                 0.72       0.73         0.68
  6             −4.95             2.47              1.16                 0.70       0.72         0.66                 0.52
  7             −4.93             2.44              1.14                 0.72       0.70         0.64                 0.52        0.53
  8             −5.02             2.43              1.15                 0.76       0.71         0.67                 0.53        0.50         0.42

Note: Empty cells indicate the coefficient for the respective predictor is assumed zero. For predictor definitions see Table 1.




data sets: in one study only 5% had DVT and in another as many as 39% did. Similarly, somewhat more participants in the
development data (69%) had an abnormal D-dimer value than in the pooled validation data (58%), but in the individual
validation data sets this ranged from 39% to 82%. Clearly, some of the validation data sets are not representative of the
target population from which the development data are sampled, which may lead to worse discriminative ability in these
validation data sets than had they all been representative of the target population. As the validation data as a whole might
represent the target population quite well, one may not expect poor discriminative ability on average but heterogeneous
results across the different validation sets.


3.1          Methods

The data from one study in the target population (referred to as “development study”) were used to develop eight logistic
regression prediction models for the probability that DVT is present. We considered that these models were available
from the published literature, and used the 12 remaining data sets to externally validate them. This was used to mimic
a situation where existing models are already available, and the IPD from their development sample can be obtained.
Coefficients for eight prespecified predictors were estimated: positive d-dimer test, calf difference >3 cm (not available
as continuous), oral contraceptive usage, male sex, no presence of leg trauma, vein distension, active malignancy, and
recent surgery (Table 2). Prediction model 1 consisted of only the first predictor and prediction model 2 consisted of the
first two and so forth. Our aim was to investigate to what extent these 8 models generalized well across the 12 external
validation samples and to what extent variability in their concordance could be attributed to lack of transportability or
rather to case-mix heterogeneity.
    We externally validated the discriminative ability of the 8 prediction models in each of the 12 external validation
studies, by estimating for each prediction model the traditional unstandardized c-statistic and our proposed standard-
ized c-statistic described in Section 2.2. The propensity model for the standardized c-statistic was a multinomial logistic
regression model with linear terms for DVT and all predictors, where the endpoint was the study identifier. The develop-
ment sample was taken as the target population. This reflects the situation where the inclusion and exclusion criteria for
the development sample are defined such that this sample reflects the population in which the prediction model is to be
used, as is generally recommended.14
    To summarize these models’ estimated discrimination across the 12 validation studies and to investigate their
generalizability across the different settings and populations,46,47 we then applied random-effects meta-analysis:
                                                                             (             )
                                                                     𝜃̂ j ∼  𝜃j , V(𝜃̂ j ) ,
                                                                             (          )
                                                                     𝜃j ∼  𝜃RE , 𝜏 2 ,                                                               (9)

where 𝜃̂ j is the logit concordance estimated in validation sample j, with estimated variance V(𝜃̂ j ), 𝜃RE is the summary
parameter of mean logit discrimination and 𝜏 2 the heterogeneity of true logit concordance values across validation sam-
ples. The concordance estimates were first converted to the logit scale to satisfy the normality assumption of the random
                                                                                                                                                    10970258, 2023, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sim.9817 by Cochrane Netherlands, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
JONG et al.                                                                                                                                  3515



effects meta-analysis, as recommended.48 The meta-analyses were estimated with REML and 95% confidence intervals
were estimated by the Hartung-Knapp-Sidik-Jonkman method.49,50 Approximate 95% prediction intervals for the dis-
criminative ability in a new study were constructed using the approach of Higgins et al, using the t-distribution with 10
degrees of freedom.51 The confidence intervals for the propensity-weighted c-statistic were obtained with 5000 resamples
with replacement, with sampling probabilities equal to the weights as defined in Section 2.


3.2                         Results

The meta-analysis summary estimates indicate that, as expected, discriminative ability was greater for those prediction
models that included more predictors. In particular, the pooled c-statistic for the prediction model that only included
D-dimer as predictor was 0.70 (95% CI from 0.66 to 0.74), whereas the prediction model with 8 predictors yielded a
pooled c-statistic of 0.82 (95% CI from 0.80 to 0.84). Further, we found that summary estimates for the c-statistic that were
obtained via propensity standardization did not differ much from the crude (ie, non-standardized) summary estimates
(Table S1 in the online Supporting Information, Figure 1). This similarity in the estimated center of the distribution of
discriminative ability measures implies that in this applied example, the propensity score method did not reveal any bias
due to sampling from populations different from the target population.
    However, we found that the discriminative ability estimates in the external validation samples were prone to substan-
tial between-study heterogeneity. The approximate 95% prediction interval for the pooled c-statistic for model 1 ranged
from 0.55 to 0.82, indicating that the model does not transport well to some of the non-target populations. However, when
standardizing the validation studies, the heterogeneity estimate 𝜏̂ for model 1 decreased from 0.29 to 0.08 and the 95% pre-
diction interval became much more narrow (0.64-0.72). These additional results reveal that between-study heterogeneity
in the discriminative ability of prediction model 1 can partially be attributed to differences in case-mix, rather than the
use of non-generalizable model coefficients.
    The inclusion of additional predictors reduced the heterogeneity of the unstandardized c-statistic. For instance, for
prediction model 8, we found 𝜏̂ = 0.17 for the unstandardized c-statistic. On the other hand, the heterogeneity of the
standardized c-statistic was greater for models that included more predictors. For instance, for prediction model 8 we
found 𝜏̂ = 0.28 for the standardized c-statistic. Hence, in the unstandardized validation samples the heterogeneity of the
c-statistic was lower for models that included more predictors, indicating that the additional predictors corrected for


                      0.9
                                                                                                    0.4




                                                                        Tau for logit c−statistic
                      0.8                                                                           0.3




Summary c−statistic
                                                                                                    0.2
                      0.7



                                                       weighted                                     0.1
                      0.6                                     No
                                                              Yes

                                                                                                    0.0
                            1   2     3   4   5   6       7         8                                     1   2   3   4   5   6   7      8
                                          Model                                                                       Model

F I G U R E 1 Summary (95% CI and 95% approximate PI), and heterogeneity estimates (95% CI) of the concordance in 12 external
validation samples before and after weighting. Summary and heterogeneity values are respectively estimated as the inverse logit of summary
parameter 𝜃RE and as the standard deviation parameter 𝜏 in the random effects meta-analysis of the logit c-statistics estimated in the external
validation samples. CI, confidence interval; Approximate PI, approximate prediction interval.
                                                                                                                                10970258, 2023, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sim.9817 by Cochrane Netherlands, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
3516                                                                                                              JONG et al.



differences in case-mix. In the standardized validation samples the heterogeneity of the c-statistic was greater for models
that included more predictors, indicating that for the patients in the validation samples who had predictor variables
similar to those in the development data there was greater variability in the discriminative performance.
    In conclusion, the standardized prediction model concordance measures disentangled the effect of differences in
case-mix and the generalizability of predictor-outcome associations between the development and validation samples. In
the following section, we assess the statistical properties of the proposed methods through a simulation study.


4          SIMULATIONS

In this simulation, we aim to study the validity of different methods to estimate the discriminative ability of a prediction
model in a certain target population, when validation data from a population with a (somewhat) different case-mix is
available. The simulation is split into two sections. In Section 4.1, we aim to show the impact of different deviations in
case-mix, whereas in Section 4.2 we investigate which variables should be included in the propensity model. In both sets
of simulations we investigate the requirement to include non-linear effects.


4.1          Methods simulations set A

We investigated the effect of changes in the predictor distribution (or case-mix) on the estimated concordance in an
external validation set. We changed the predictor distribution of the validation sample with respect to the development
sample, which resembled a sample from the target population. The simulation was performed in four stages:

1. Draw a development sample from the target population and develop one prediction model on this sample.
2. Draw a validation sample and develop the propensity models on both samples combined.
3. Estimate the propensity-weighted and unweighted concordances in the validation sample.
4. Draw a reference sample from the target population and estimate concordance for the prediction model on this sample.

       We drew samples as follows:
                                           Xb ∼ Bernoulli(𝜋),
                                           Xc ∼ N(𝜇, 𝜎 2 ),
                                           Y ∼ Bernoulli(g(−2 + 𝛽b Xb + 𝛽c Xc )),                                       (10)

where g(z) = 1∕(1 + e−z )). For the development and reference samples we fixed the following parameters: 𝜋 = 0.2, 𝜇 =
0, 𝜎 = 1, 𝛽b = 1, and 𝛽c = 1. This reference sample could thus be used to estimate the out-of-sample concordance in the
target population. The validation samples were drawn following the same procedure, but we introduced differences in
case-mix to simulate between-study heterogeneity. We investigated six scenarios in which the validation sample predictor
distribution was different from the target population and one null scenario in which the validation sample originated
from the target population. The predictor distributions for the validation sample were as follows as compared to the target
population:

1. No difference; the development and validation samples were sampled from the same distribution.
2. The standard deviation 𝜎 of the continuous predictor decreased to 0.8.
3. The standard deviation 𝜎 of the continuous predictor increased to 1.2.
4. The prevalence 𝜋 of the binary predictor was decreased to 0.1.
5. The prevalence 𝜋 of the binary predictor was increased to 0.4.
6. The mean 𝜇 of the continuous predictor decreased to −0.4.
7. The mean 𝜇 of the continuous predictor increased to 0.4.
8. The continuous predictor was truncated at [−1, 1].
9. The continuous predictor in the validation data still followed Equation (10), but now the continuous predictor in the
   development sample was truncated at [1, 1].

    We applied two binary logistic propensity models with different parameter specifications. The first estimated the prob-
ability of study membership by a linear combination of the predictors (Equation 2), whereas the second included natural
                                                                                                                                   10970258, 2023, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sim.9817 by Cochrane Netherlands, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
JONG et al.                                                                                                                 3517



cubic splines for the continuous predictor (Equation 3). Hence, we estimated two standardized estimates and one unstan-
dardized estimate of the concordance in each simulation iteration. We evaluated these estimates by comparing them
with the observed concordance in the reference sample and computing bias and mean square error (MSE). Each scenario
was repeated for 2000 iterations, for two sample sizes of the development sample: n = 500 and n = 2000. The validation
sample always contained 2000 observations and the reference sample 10 000.


4.2           Methods simulations set B

In additional simulations, in an extension of scenario 1 (decreased 𝜎), we investigated whether an additional variable, W,
that is not part of the prediction model but that has been measured in each data set should be included in the propensity
model, when trying to standardize the validation set towards a target population. We consider three sampling mechanisms
for W and Xc :
                                                         W ∼ N(0, 1)
                                                         Xc ∼ N(𝜇, 1),                                                     (11)

                                                      W ∼ N(0, 1)
                                                      Xc ∼ N(W + 𝜇, 1),                                                    (12)

                                                        Xc ∼ N(𝜇, 1),
                                                        W ∼ N(Xc , 1).                                                     (13)

    For the association between Y and W, we now allow Y to be dependent on W as well:

                                        Y ∼ Bernoulli(g(−2 + 𝛽b Xb + 𝛽c Xc + 𝛽w W)),                                       (14)

   This gives six combinations of associations for Xc , W, and Y , which we investigated in the following simulation
scenarios:

1. 𝛽w = 0 (ie, no association), sampling of W and Xc according to Equation (11).
2. 𝛽w = 0 (ie, no association), sampling of W and Xc according to Equation (12).
3. 𝛽w = 0 (ie, no association), sampling of W and Xc according to Equation (13).
4. 𝛽w = 1, sampling of W and Xc according to Equation (11).
5. 𝛽w = 1, sampling of W and Xc according to Equation (12).
6. 𝛽w = 1, sampling of W and Xc according to Equation (13).

    We applied four binary logistic propensity models with different parameter specifications. The first estimated the
probability of study membership by a linear combination of the predictors in the prediction model (Equation 2), whereas
the second the variables in the prediction model but also the covariate W that was not part of the prediction model. The
third included natural cubic splines for the continuous predictor in the prediction model (Equation 3), and the fourth
included natural cubic spline for the covariate W that was not part of the prediction model as well as the continuous
variable in the prediction model. Hence, we estimated four standardized estimates and one unstandardized estimate of
the concordance in each simulation iteration. The sample sizes were the same as in simulation set A. The R code for the
simulation study is available on Github (https://github.com/VMTdeJong/wAUC-sim).


4.3           Results simulation set A

Figure 2 highlights the predictor distributions in the first repetition for three scenarios where the distribution of one of the
predictors was altered in the validation sample. Consequently, the unweighted distribution of the corresponding predictor
in the validation data did not match the target distribution. In scenario #4 (top), where the prevalence of the binary
predictor was increased in the validation data, both propensity methods appropriately weighted the distribution of the
validation sample, leading to a weighted distribution of the binary predictor to be similar to the target distribution. Also
in scenario #6 (middle), where the mean of the continuous predictor was increased in the validation data, both propensity
                                                                                                                                                       10970258, 2023, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sim.9817 by Cochrane Netherlands, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
3518                                                                                                                                     JONG et al.



                                          (Weighted) distribution of the binary predictor, when the prevalence is increased

             1000


             600
   Count


             0 200

                                          Target distribution        Propensity              Propensity, splines       Unweighted / naive




                                              (Weighted) density of the continuous predictor when the mean is increased




             0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
                                                                                                                             Development data /
                                                                                                                             target density


   Density
                                                                                                                             Propensity
                                                                                                                             Propensity, splines
                                                                                                                             Unweighted / naive



                                           −4                   −2                     0                           2                 4

                                                                           Continuous predictor value



                                                (Weighted) density of the continuous predictor when the SD is increased




             0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
   Density




                                           −4                   −2                     0                           2                 4

                                                                           Continuous predictor value


F I G U R E 2 Distributions of predictors before and after weighting. Top: Scenario #4, where the prevalence of the binary predictor was
increased in the validation data. Middle: Scenario #6, where the mean of the continuous predictor was increased in the validation data.
Bottom: Scenario #2, where the standard deviation of the continuous predictor was increased in the validation data. The development sample
size was 2000 in each of these plots.


methods appropriately weighted the density of the continuous predictor. However, in scenario #2 (bottom), where the
standard deviation of the continuous predictor was increased in the validation data, only the propensity method that used
splines appropriately weighted the density of the continuous predictor. The density as weighted by the propensity method
with linear terms was nearly identical to the density of the original (unweighted) validation sample.


4.3.1                              Bias

Bias was either positive, negative or (near-)zero, depending on the scenario and method (Figure 3). In scenario 0, where
the validation sample originated from the target population, all methods had near-zero bias. But in scenario’s 1 and 2,
                                                                                                                                                10970258, 2023, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sim.9817 by Cochrane Netherlands, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
JONG et al.                                                                                                                              3519



                                    n development = 500                                           n development = 2000




              0.05




      Bias    0.00




             −0.05




                     0    1     2      3     4     5      6      7     8        0     1       2      3     4    5        6   7    8
                                                                      Scenario

                                                              Propensity                  Unweighted / naive
                                            Method
                                                              Propensity, splines



F I G U R E 3 Bias and 95% CI of the estimated concordance before and after weighting. Concordance was estimated in the (weighted)
external validation data for all methods. Bias was subsequently estimated by subtracting the estimate in the reference sample. 95% confidence
intervals (CI) were estimated as 2.5% and 97.5% percentiles of 5000 bootstrap samples.


where the standard deviation of the continuous predictor was changed, both the propensity method with linear terms and
the unweighted method were negatively and positively biased respectively, whereas the spline-based propensity method
had near-zero bias. In scenario 3 and 4, where the prevalence of the binary predictor was changed, both propensity meth-
ods were nearly unbiased, whereas the unweighted method showed negative and positive bias, respectively. In scenario 5
and 6, where the mean of the continuous predictor was changed, both propensity methods were nearly unbiased, whereas
the unweighted method showed positive and negative bias, respectively.
    In scenario 7, where continuous predictor was truncated in the validation sample, all methods showed negative bias,
but less so for the propensity method with splines. In scenario 8, the unweighted method and the propensity method
with linear terms were positively biased, whereas the propensity method with splines was nearly unbiased when the
development sample size was 500. Sample size had a minimal impact on the results; only in scenario 8 we see a notable
difference. There the propensity method with splines also showed some bias, but this was of a far smaller order of
magnitude than the propensity method with linear terms and the unweighted method.
                                                                                                                                                 10970258, 2023, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sim.9817 by Cochrane Netherlands, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
3520                                                                                                                               JONG et al.



4.3.2            MSE

In scenario 0, where the validation sample originated from the target population, all methods had low RMSE (Figure 4).
In scenario 1 and 2, where the standard deviation of the continuous predictor was changed, the RMSE of the propensity
method with linear terms and the unweighted method were far greater than that of the propensity method with splines.
In scenario 3 and 4, where the prevalence of the binary predictor was changed, the methods had similar RMSE, though
in scenario 4 the unweighted method had slightly lower RMSE when the sample size was small. In scenario 5, where the
standard deviation of the continuous predictor was lower in the validation sample, all methods had similar RMSE. In
scenario 6, where the standard deviation of the continuous predictor was higher in the validation sample, the unweighted
method had slightly lower RMSE.
    In scenario 7, where the continuous predictor was truncated in the validation sample, all methods had much higher
RMSE than in the other scenarios, though the propensity method with splines had a lower RMSE than the other methods.
In scenario 8, where the continuous predictor was truncated in the development sample, the propensity method with



                                    n development = 500                                         n development = 2000


               0.08




               0.06




        RMSE

               0.04




               0.02




                      0   1     2      3    4     5       6      7     8        0   1       2      3     4    5        6   7   8
                                                                      Scenario

                                                              Propensity                Unweighted / naive
                                            Method
                                                              Propensity, splines


F I G U R E 4 Root mean square error and 95% CI of the estimated concordance before and after weighting. Concordance is estimated in
the (weighted) external validation data for all methods. RMSE was subsequently estimated using the estimate in the reference sample. 95%
confidence intervals (CI) were estimated as 2.5% and 97.5% percentiles of 5000 bootstrap samples.
                                                                                                                                              10970258, 2023, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sim.9817 by Cochrane Netherlands, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
JONG et al.                                                                                                                            3521



linear terms and the unweighted method had far greater RMSE than the propensity method that used splines. Sample
size of the development set was of very limited importance for RMSE.


4.4            Results simulation set B

4.4.1            Bias

In scenario 9 to 12 and 14, where an additional covariate was present in the samples from the target population and
the validation sample, the propensity methods with splines were (nearly) unbiased regardless of whether the additional
covariate was included in the propensity model, whereas the unweighted approach showed varying amounts of bias
(Figure 5). Only in scenario 13, where the predictor Xc was causally affected by the covariate W and 𝛽W was nonzero,


                                   n development = 500                                        n development = 2000


              0.03




              0.02




              0.01
      Bias




              0.00




             −0.01




                        9    10        11       12       13        14             9      10       11        12        13       14
                                                                       Scenario

                                                 Propensity, splines                             Unweighted / naive
                                  Method
                                                 Propensity, splines, with extra covariate


F I G U R E 5 Bias and 95% CI of the estimated concordance before and after weighting possibly using an additional variable.
Concordance was estimated in the (weighted) external validation data for all methods. Bias was subsequently estimated by subtracting the
estimate in the reference sample. 95% confidence intervals (CI) were estimated as 2.5% and 97.5% percentiles of 5000 bootstrap samples.
                                                                                                                                             10970258, 2023, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sim.9817 by Cochrane Netherlands, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
3522                                                                                                                           JONG et al.



both propensity methods were biased and adding the extra covariate only slightly reduced this, whereas the unweighted
approach showed less bias.


4.4.2           RMSE

In scenario 9 to 12 and 14, where an additional covariate was present in the samples from the target population and
the validation sample, the propensity methods had less RMSE than the unweighted approach, regardless of whether the
additional covariate was included in the propensity score model (Figure 6). Only in scenario 13, where the predictor



                                 n development = 500                                          n development = 2000




        0.030




        0.025




 RMSE
        0.020




        0.015




        0.010


                  9        10        11       12        13        14            9        10        11        12        13        14
                                                                     Scenario

                                               Propensity, splines                                Unweighted / naive
                                Method
                                               Propensity, splines, with extra covariate


F I G U R E 6 Root mean square error and 95% CI of the estimated concordance before and after weighting possibly using an additional
variable. Concordance is estimated in the (weighted) external validation data for all methods. RMSE was subsequently estimated using the
estimate in the reference sample. 95% confidence intervals (CI) were estimated as 2.5% and 97.5% percentiles of 5000 bootstrap samples.
                                                                                                                                10970258, 2023, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sim.9817 by Cochrane Netherlands, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
JONG et al.                                                                                                              3523



Xc was causally affected by the covariate W and 𝛽W was nonzero, the propensity methods had greater RMSE than the
unweighted approach.


4.5           Summary

In some scenarios, notably when the standard deviation of a predictor changed or when a predictor was truncated, the
unweighted validation approach produced concordance estimates that had large bias and RMSE. The propensity method
with linear terms could not mitigate this issue when it occurred, but the spline-based propensity model did in most sce-
narios. The exception was when the continuous predictor was truncated in the validation sample. Then, the spline-based
propensity model only slightly reduced the bias and RMSE.
    Also, when a covariate W was present in the development and validation set that was not part of the prediction model,
adding this covariate to the propensity model increased bias and RMSE unless the predictor Xc was causally affected by
the covariate W and 𝛽W was nonzero. Figures that show concordance as estimated on the development data are provided
in the Supporting Information.


5        DISCUSSION

We proposed a method for standardizing samples in which a prediction model can be validated for a target population.
When validating a prediction model in an external validation study, there may be important differences between the
case-mix distribution from this validation study and the intended target population and setting. When such differences
occur, estimates of model discrimination in the validation study may not be representative of the discrimination in the
intended target population and setting. For instance, it may occur that the estimated coefficients of a previously devel-
oped prediction model are generalizable to the validation sample, but that a difference in the case-mix distribution with
respect to the development sample affects discriminative ability. Any deterioration in estimated discriminative ability,
as compared to previous studies, should then not be attributed to the prediction model but to the sample of included
participants.
     Standardization methods, as shown in this study, facilitate the interpretation of prediction model discrimination
differences found in a validation sample with respect to the target population and possibly other validation samples.
In particular, by standardizing validation samples with respect to the target population, it becomes possible to remove
or reduce the impact of case-mix effects on prediction model discrimination estimates found in the validation sam-
ples. In other words, standardization allows one to interpret validation study results as if the case-mix distributions
would remain unchanged as compared to the original target population. In our study, we defined the development
sample as originating from the target population, and standardized the validation samples towards this sample. In
practice, multiple target populations of interest might exist for the same model. Indeed, IPD may even contain repre-
sentative samples from multiple possible target populations. In such cases, our proposed methods provide the means
to estimate discriminative ability in each one at a time, avoiding the mistake of averaging discriminative ability over
all samples.
     As case-mix differences can be found with regard to many variables (predictors and/or outcome), we propose a mul-
tivariable standardization approach, which has originally been described in the causal inference literature to balance
covariate distributions across patient settings under different “exposures”.37,38 Transposing this framework to clinical pre-
diction model development and validation research, one can consider the memberships to the development or external
validation settings as “exposures”. Similar approaches have been suggested to anticipate the external validity of results
from RCTs52 and to use a larger sample size by including propensity weighted external data to assess the intervention
effect in a (single) trial.53
     The results of the simulation study confirm that estimating an unweighted concordance in a sample that does not
originate from the intended target population produces estimates of discrimination that are inaccurate and biased for the
actual discrimination in a sample from the target setting in most of the scenarios that we investigated. In the scenarios
of the simulation study where the standard deviation of the continuous predictor was altered in the validation data,
only the propensity method that used splines appropriately weighted the density of the continuous predictor. This is
because, in contrast to the scenarios where the prevalence of the binary predictor was changed, the change in the predictor
distribution was nonlinear. When the standard deviation was decreased, both very large and very small values of the
                                                                                                                                10970258, 2023, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sim.9817 by Cochrane Netherlands, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
3524                                                                                                              JONG et al.



continuous predictor indicated that the observation was not typical for the target population and should therefore be
down-weighted, and vice versa when the standard deviation was increased. A propensity model with linear terms could
not capture such a change in distribution, but one that utilizes splines could. Accordingly, the spline-based propensity
model was the only method that produced estimates of the discrimination in the intended target population that were
both unbiased and had small error in this scenario.
    The proposed method appears particularly useful when the standard deviation of a continuous predictor is differ-
ent in the validation sample. This may, for instance, be the case when the development data are taken from an RCT
in a hospital setting, where strict inclusion criteria are used for participant selection, which leads to narrower distribu-
tions of predictors. Often participants with extreme values are excluded. For instance, it is common that both children
and the elderly are excluded. If the model is then validated in observational data of the target population, which also
includes children and the elderly, then the standard deviation of age will be greater in the validation data than in the
development data. This will lead to higher unweighted estimates of discrimination, which would not be representative
of the discrimination in the RCT setting. Propensity weighting of the observational data could then be used to adjust
for this difference in predictor distributions, and thereby facilitate the interpretation of model discrimination in the
RCT setting.
    The opposite may be more difficult, however. If a prediction model is validated in a sample with restricted vari-
ability (ie, in terms of range) as compared to the development sample, then propensity standardization methods
may not always be able to fully mitigate the effects of differing predictor distributions. This is because re-weighting
can only alter the frequency distribution on the sampled domain, but it cannot extend the domain. For example,
when applying a prediction model that was developed in adults to adolescents or children, differences in age dis-
tribution cannot be fully recovered using re-weighting due to a lack of representation in the validation data. We
observed this problem in the simulation study when the continuous predictor was truncated in the validation sam-
ple (scenario 7). There, neither propensity method could fully correct the concordance estimates for the reduction
in heterogeneity of the predictor distribution (though, the propensity method with nonlinear terms removed some
of the bias).
    We also investigated whether a baseline covariate that was not part of the prediction model but that had been
measured in both the sample from the target population and in the validation sample should be included in the
propensity model. The results show that such a covariate should not necessarily be included in the propensity
model unless this covariate is a cause of both the outcome and a predictor included in the model. In this case,
there exists a backdoor linking the predictor and the outcome via that third variable (W). If this variable W also
affects the sample selection, along with the predictors and the outcome, then there is likely an additional relation-
ship that is created via collider-stratification when working (restricting) on the study sample, which could explain
the bias observed in the scenario where W affects X, and W is predictive of the outcome. This additional relation-
ship could be theoretically removed if one conditioned on W. However, because the predictor and the outcome lie
on the path between W and the sample selection, a simple propensity score including both W and the predictor is
unlikely to be able to account for this complex structure, thereby not completely eliminating bias. Further studies are
needed to explore whether a more thorough structural consideration of the propensity score construction could help
eliminate bias.
    Although, we observed considerable differences in heterogeneity between the standardized and unstandardized
measures of prediction model discriminative ability in the motivating example of 12 external validation studies, the abso-
lute differences in the summary estimates were minor. Overall, the validation samples were not very distinct from the
development sample.
    In terms of heterogeneity of the prediction models’ discriminative ability, we did observe considerable differences
after standardization. There was less heterogeneity of discrimination after standardization for the model with one pre-
dictor, though, as the number of predictors increased this difference disappeared or even reversed, because the additional
predictors’ coefficients were not generalizable to patients from all studies when these studies were weighted towards the
development data.


5.1       Limitations and future directions

Standardization using propensity score weighting methods can be performed in different ways.24,25,37,38 Applica-
tion of the propensity methods requires access to the validation data and an approximation of the joint density of
                                                                                                                                   10970258, 2023, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sim.9817 by Cochrane Netherlands, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
JONG et al.                                                                                                                 3525



the target population. Here we have used a sample of the target population to fulfil the latter requirement, but
other approximations might be conceived, such as a multivariate normal approximation or simpler methods such
as raking.54 Such methods may prove useful when development IPD is not available and only summary statistics
can be accessed, but would require further research. An alternative approach is possible if the model-based concordance
(mbc) has been estimated for the development data. Then, subtracting the mbc at validation would provide an estimate
of the difference in discriminative ability resulting from differences in case-mix between the two samples.23
    In our motivating example, we chose weights that allowed the validation samples to resemble the (single) develop-
ment sample in terms of case-mix. Another strategy could be to define weights such that the sample to be standardized
approximates all available studies or settings taken together (ie, “entire population”), akin to the “inverse probability
weighting” described in the causal inference literature.25 In fact, the choice between standardization weights should
be made according to the target population. That is, it should depend on whether the prediction model aims for a
specific homogeneous setting or a larger scale population. Further studies are needed to compare these weighting meth-
ods. Future research should also take into account other issues that may compromise model transportability, such as
measurement error.5
    Further, propensity scores might also be used to standardize samples for a specific target population during model
development on a data set that consists of multiple, combined, data sets. In contrast to the here studied standard
dichotomy between development and validation data sets, re-weighting the development data to match a specific target
population increases the sample size available for model development in the target population. For instance, in an IPDMA
with the aim to develop a prediction model, data from RTCs may be included. Due to strict eligibility criteria, data from
these RCTs might not fully match the intended target population. Simply stacking every such available data set for model
development purposes would then bias model parameters and deteriorate its predictive discriminative ability. Standard-
ization may then help to estimate model parameters with respect to the target population and to assess its reproducibility
in the targeted population. On the other hand, if a certain subgroup is not represented in the validation sample, it can-
not be up-weighted, implying that data from an RCT with restrictive inclusion criteria cannot be standardized towards a
wider population.
    Although, we investigated a range of differences in case-mix between the target population and the validation sam-
ple, and we investigated several (possibly causal) relations between a predictor variable and a covariate that was not part
of the prediction model in our simulation study, there are (combinations of) scenarios that we did not investigate. For
instance, in our simulations the additional covariate was a baseline covariate, but we did not consider covariates or sec-
ondary outcomes measured after the measurement of the outcome of interest. Further, if the regression coefficients in
the validation sample differ from those in the target population after weighting the validation sample, the predictor sam-
ples are not truly exchangeable or the predictor coefficients are different. The propensity score is then not sufficient to
standardize the samples.


5.2           Conclusion

Propensity score-based standardization may be applied to estimate the discriminative ability in the target population,
when (some of the) validation samples do not fully reflect the target population. This helps to facilitate the interpretation of
(heterogeneity in) prediction model discriminative ability observed in (multiple) validation studies and to guide the need
for prediction model updating strategies (in particular the need for model re-estimation) or to accept that the validation
sample does not reflect the target population of the developed model. Further research may focus on the use of propensity
score weighting during model development on heterogeneous data sets, such as IPDMA or large clustered routine care
data sets, to enhance the reproducibility of prediction models.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank all the reviewers for very constructive feedback that has improved the article. This project has received funding
from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under ReCoDID Grant agreement No.
825746.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
We gratefully acknowledge the following authors for sharing of individual participant data from the deep vein
thrombosis (DVT) studies: G. J. Geersing, N. P. A. Zuithoff, C. Kearon, D. R. Anderson, A. J. ten Cate-Hoek, J. L. Elf,
                                                                                                                                                     10970258, 2023, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sim.9817 by Cochrane Netherlands, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
3526                                                                                                                                  JONG et al.



S. M. Bates, A. W. Hoes, R. A. Kraaijenhagen, R. Oudega, R. E. G. Schutgens, S. M. Stevens, S. C. Woller, P. S. Wells,
and K. G. M. Moons. The DVT data that support the findings of this study are not publicly available, according to the
conditions determined by the authors of the DVT studies, but are available on request from G. J. Geersing, by e-mailing
G.J.Geersing@umcutrecht.nl.
    The analyses in the applied example can be reproduced with an R script provided as supplementary online material.
As the data are not publicly available, we used the DVTipd dataset in the metamisc R package. As this is a synthetic
dataset, the results do not match the results presented in this manuscript.

ORCID
Valentijn M. T. de Jong https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9921-3468
Jeroen Hoogland https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2397-6052
Richard D. Riley https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8699-0735
Tri-Long Nguyen https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6376-7212
Thomas P. A. Debray https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1790-2719

REFERENCES
 1. Riley RD, van der Windt D, Croft P, Moons KGM. Prognosis Research in Healthcare: Concepts, Methods, and Impact. Oxford: Oxford
    University Press; 2019.
 2. Siontis GCM, Tzoulaki I, Castaldi PJ, Ioannidis JPA. External validation of new risk prediction models is infrequent and reveals worse
    prognostic discrimination. J Clin Epidemiol. 2015;68(1):25-34.
 3. Debray TPA, Vergouwe Y, Koffijberg H, Nieboer D, Steyerberg EW, Moons KGM. A new framework to enhance the interpretation of
    external validation studies of clinical prediction models. J Clin Epidemiol. 2015;68(3):279-289.
 4. Vergouwe Y, Moons KGM, Steyerberg EW. External validity of risk models: use of benchmark values to disentangle a case-mix effect from
    incorrect coefficients. Am J Epidemiol. 2010;172(8):971-980.
 5. Pajouheshnia R, van Smeden M, Peelen LM, Groenwold RHH. How variation in predictor measurement affects the discriminative ability
    and transportability of a prediction model. J Clin Epidemiol. 2019;105:136-141.
 6. Harrell FE, Lee KL, Mark DB. Multivariable prognostic models: issues in developing models, evaluating assumptions and adequacy, and
    measuring and reducing errors. Stat Med. 1996;15(4):361-387.
 7. van Smeden M, Moons KGM, de Groot JAH, et al. Sample size for binary logistic prediction models: beyond events per variable criteria.
    Stat Methods Med Res. 2018;28(8):2455-2474.
 8. Riley RD, Snell KI, Ensor J, et al. Minimum sample size for developing a multivariable prediction model: PART II-binary and time-to-event
    outcomes. Stat Med. 2019;38(7):1276-1296.
 9. de Jong VMT, Eijkemans MJC, van Calster B, et al. Sample size considerations and predictive performance of multinomial logistic
    prediction models. Stat Med. 2019;38(9):1601-1619.
10. Altman DG, Royston P. What do we mean by validating a prognostic model? Stat Med. 2000;19(4):453-473.
11. Justice AC, Covinsky KE, Berlin JA. Assessing the generalizability of prognostic information. Ann Intern Med. 1999;130(6):
    515-524.
12. Luijken K, Groenwold RHH, Calster BV, Steyerberg EW, van Smeden M. Impact of predictor measurement heterogeneity across settings
    on the performance of prediction models: a measurement error perspective. Stat Med. 2019;38(18):3444-3459.
13. Charlson ME, Ales KL, Simon R, MacKenzie CR. Why predictive indexes perform less well in validation studies: is it magic or methods?
    Arch Intern Med. 1987;147(12):2155-2161.
14. Moons KGM, Altman DG, Reitsma JB, et al. Transparent reporting of a multivariable prediction model for individual prognosis or diagnosis
    (TRIPOD): explanation and elaboration. Ann Intern Med. 2015;162(1):W1-W73.
15. Wynants L, Calster BV, Collins GS, et al. Prediction models for diagnosis and prognosis of covid-19: systematic review and critical appraisal.
    BMJ. 2020;369:m1328.
16. Riley RD, Tierney JF, Stewart LA. Individual Participant Data Meta-Analysis: A Handbook for Healthcare Research. Chichester: Wiley;
    2021.
17. Altman DG, Vergouwe Y, Royston P, Moons KGM. Prognosis and prognostic research: validating a prognostic model. BMJ. 2009;
    338:b605.
18. Steyerberg EW. Clinical Prediction Models: A Practical Approach to Development, Validation, and Updating. New York: Springer Science &
    Business Media; 2009.
19. Steyerberg EW, Moons KGM, van der Windt DA, et al. Prognosis research strategy (PROGRESS) 3: prognostic model research. PLoS Med.
    2013;10(2):e1001381.
20. Moons KGM, Kengne AP, Grobbee DE, et al. Risk prediction models: II. External validation, model updating, and impact assessment.
    Heart. 2012;98(9):691-698.
21. Austin PC, Steyerberg EW. Interpreting the concordance statistic of a logistic regression model: relation to the variance and odds ratio of
    a continuous explanatory variable. BMC Med Res Methodol. 2012;12(1):82.
                                                                                                                                                    10970258, 2023, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sim.9817 by Cochrane Netherlands, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
JONG et al.                                                                                                                                  3527



22. van Klaveren D, Gönen M, Steyerberg EW, Vergouwe Y. A new concordance measure for risk prediction models in external validation
    settings. Stat Med. 2016;35(23):4136-4152.
23. van Klaveren D, Steyerberg EW, Gönen M, Vergouwe Y. The calibrated model-based concordance improved assessment of discriminative
    ability in patient clusters of limited sample size. Diagn Progn Res. 2019;3(1):11.
24. Rosenbaum PR, Rubin DB. The central role of the propensity score in observational studies for causal effects. Biometrika. 1983;70(1):
    41-55.
25. Rosenbaum PR. Model-based direct adjustment. J Am Stat Assoc. 1987;82(398):387-394.
26. Riley RD, Ensor J, Snell KIE, et al. External validation of clinical prediction models using big datasets from e-health records or IPD
    meta-analysis: opportunities and challenges. BMJ. 2016;353:i3140.
27. de Jong VMT, Moons KGM, Eijkemans MJC, Riley RD, Debray TPA. Developing more generalizable prediction models from pooled studies
    and large clustered data sets. Stat Med. 2021;40(15):3533-3559.
28. de Jong VMT, Hoogland J, Debray TPA, Nguyen TL. Propensity-based standardization to enhance the interpretation of predictive perfor-
    mance in external validation studies. In: de Jong VMT, ed. Methods for Individual Participant Data Meta-Analysis in Prediction Research.
    Utrecht: Utrecht University; 2020:73-86. doi:10.33540/469
29. Riley RD, Snell KIE, Wynants L, de Jong VMT, Moons KGM, Debray TPA. IPD meta-analysis for clinical prediction model research. In:
    Riley RD, Tierney JF, Stewart LA, eds. Individual Participant Data Meta-Analysis: A Handbook for Healthcare Research. Hoboken, NJ:
    Wiley Online Library; 2021:447-497.
30. Shmueli G. To explain or to predict? Stat Sci. 2010;25(3):289-310.
31. Hernán MA. The C-word: scientific euphemisms do not improve causal inference from observational data. Am J Public Health.
    2018;108(5):616-619.
32. Nowacki AS, Wells BJ, Yu C, Kattan MW. Adding propensity scores to pure prediction models fails to improve predictive performance.
    PeerJ. 2013;1:e123.
33. Groenwold RHH, Moons KGM, Pajouheshnia R, et al. Explicit inclusion of treatment in prognostic modeling was recommended in
    observational and randomized settings. J Clin Epidemiol. 2016;78:90-100.
34. Pajouheshnia R, Peelen LM, Moons KGM, Reitsma JB, Groenwold RHH. Accounting for treatment use when validating a prognostic
    model: a simulation study. BMC Med Res Methodol. 2017;17(1):103.
35. Drake C. Effects of misspecification of the propensity score on estimators of treatment effect. Biometrics. 1993;49:1231-1236.
36. Blakely T, Lynch J, Simons K, Bentley R, Rose S. Reflection on modern methods: when worlds collide—prediction, machine learning and
    causal inference. Int J Epidemiol. 2020;49(6):2058-2064.
37. Robins JM, Hernan MA, Brumback B. Marginal structural models and causal inference in epidemiology. Epidemiology. 2000;11(5):
    550-560.
38. Sato T, Matsuyama Y. Marginal structural models as a tool for standardization. Epidemiology. 2003;14(6):680-686.
39. Pajouheshnia R, Groenwold RH, Peelen LM, Reitsma JB, Moons KG. When and how to use data from randomised trials to develop or
    validate prognostic models. BMJ. 2019;365:l2154.
40. Wu S, Flach P. A scored AUC metric for classifier evaluation and selection. Proceedings of the ICML 2005 Workshop on ROC Analysis in
    Machine Learning; 2005.
41. Li J, Fine JP. Weighted area under the receiver operating characteristic curve and its application to gene selection. J R Stat Soc Ser C Appl
    Stat. 2010;59(4):673-692.
42. Carpenter J, Bithell J. Bootstrap confidence intervals: when, which, what? A practical guide for medical statisticians. Stat Med.
    2000;19(9):1141-1164.
43. Qaseem A, Snow V, Barry P, et al. Current diagnosis of venous thromboembolism in primary care: a clinical practice guideline from the
    American Academy of family physicians and the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2007;146(6):454-458.
44. Oudega R, Moons KGM, Hoes AW. Ruling out deep venous thrombosis in primary care. Thromb Haemost. 2005;94(01):200-205.
45. Geersing GJ, Zuithoff NPA, Kearon C, et al. Exclusion of deep vein thrombosis using the Wells rule in clinically important subgroups:
    individual patient data meta-analysis. BMJ. 2014;348:g1340.
46. Debray TPA, Damen JAAG, Snell KIE, et al. A guide to systematic review and meta-analysis of prediction model performance. BMJ.
    2017;356:i6460.
47. Debray TPA, Damen JAAG, Riley RD, et al. A framework for meta-analysis of prediction model studies with binary and time-to-event
    outcomes. Stat Methods Med Res. 2019;28(9):2768-2786.
48. Snell KIE, Ensor J, Debray TPA, Moons KGM, Riley RD. Meta-analysis of prediction model performance across multiple studies:
    which scale helps ensure between-study normality for the C-statistic and calibration measures? Stat Methods Med Res. 2018;27(11):
    3505-3522.
49. Knapp G, Hartung J. Improved tests for a random effects meta-regression with a single covariate. Stat Med. 2003;22(17):
    2693-2710.
50. Sidik K, Jonkman JN. Robust variance estimation for random effects meta-analysis. Comput Stat Data Anal. 2006;50(12):
    3681-3701.
51. Higgins JPT, Thompson SG, Spiegelhalter DJ. A re-evaluation of random-effects meta-analysis. J R Stat Soc A Stat Soc. 2009;172(1):
    137-159.
52. Stuart EA, Cole SR, Bradshaw CP, Leaf PJ. The use of propensity scores to assess the generalizability of results from randomized trials.
    J R Stat Soc A Stat Soc. 2011;174(2):369-386.
                                                                                                                                        10970258, 2023, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sim.9817 by Cochrane Netherlands, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
3528                                                                                                                      JONG et al.



53. Vo T, Porcher R, Chaimani A, Vansteelandt S. A novel approach for identifying and addressing case-mix heterogeneity in individual
    participant data meta-analysis. Res Synth Methods. 2019;10(4):582-596.
54. Deville JC, Särndal CE, Sautory O. Generalized raking procedures in survey sampling. J Am Stat Assoc. 1993;88(423):1013-1020.
    doi:10.1080/01621459.1993.10476369



SUPPORTING INFORMATION
Additional supporting information can be found online in the Supporting Information section at the end of this article.



   How to cite this article: de Jong VMT, Hoogland J, Moons KGM, Riley RD, Nguyen T-L, Debray TPA.
   Propensity-based standardization to enhance the validation and interpretation of prediction model discrimination
   for a target population. Statistics in Medicine. 2023;42(19):3508-3528. doi: 10.1002/sim.9817

==============================================================================
VISUAL FIGURE VALUE AUDIT
==============================================================================

# Visual figure audit: L06

Source: `pdfs/L06.pdf`; rendered the page identified by the caption inventory (PDF page 11). This page contains simulation-method text and equations, not Figure 2 itself, so the figure pass for L06 remains incomplete.

- The paper's Figures 2-6 are simulation diagnostics/results. Captions and discussion describe predictor-distribution comparisons, bias, RMSE, and propensity-score standardization across scenarios. The curves do not print a complete set of numerical coordinates; exact plotted estimates must not be invented from visual read-offs.
- Visible equations (11)-(14) on the rendered page define the simulation distributions and binary outcome model. They are captured in `txt/L06.txt`; verify mathematical glyphs against the PDF before quoting.
- The caption-page detector currently found a cross-reference rather than the figure page. A full panel-by-panel visual review remains pending.
