SOURCE ID: L20
TITLE: TabArena: A Living Benchmark for Machine Learning on Tabular Data
YEAR: 2025
DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2506.16791
PDF: ../pdfs/L20.pdf
PAGES: 66
EXTRACTION: pdftotext -layout. Page breaks are form feeds. Check equations, tables, and figures against the PDF during visual audit.
==============================================================================

                                                                TabArena: A Living Benchmark for
                                                                Machine Learning on Tabular Data


                                                Nick Erickson1 Lennart Purucker2 Andrej Tschalzev3 David Holzmüller4,5,6
                                                         Prateek Mutalik Desai1 David Salinas8,2 Frank Hutter7,8,2
                                            1
                                              Amazon Web Services 2 University of Freiburg 3 University of Mannheim 4 INRIA Paris
                                         5
                                           Ecole Normale Supérieure 6 PSL Research University 7 Prior Labs 8 ELLIS Institute Tübingen




arXiv:2506.16791v4 [cs.LG] 3 Nov 2025
                                                                             mail@tabarena.ai



                                                                                                  Abstract
                                                      With the growing popularity of deep learning and foundation models for tabu-
                                                      lar data, the need for standardized and reliable benchmarks is higher than ever.
                                                      However, current benchmarks are static. Their design is not updated even if flaws
                                                      are discovered, model versions are updated, or new models are released. To ad-
                                                      dress this, we introduce TabArena, the first continuously maintained living tabular
                                                      benchmarking system. To launch TabArena, we manually curate a representa-
                                                      tive collection of datasets and well-implemented models, conduct a large-scale
                                                      benchmarking study to initialize a public leaderboard, and assemble a team of
                                                      experienced maintainers. Our results highlight the influence of validation method
                                                      and ensembling of hyperparameter configurations to benchmark models at their
                                                      full potential. While gradient-boosted trees are still strong contenders on practical
                                                      tabular datasets, we observe that deep learning methods have caught up under
                                                      larger time budgets with ensembling. At the same time, foundation models excel
                                                      on smaller datasets. Finally, we show that ensembles across models advance the
                                                      state-of-the-art in tabular machine learning. We observe that some deep learn-
                                                      ing models are overrepresented in cross-model ensembles due to validation set
                                                      overfitting, and we encourage model developers to address this issue. We launch
                                                      TabArena with a public leaderboard, reproducible code, and maintenance protocols
                                                      to create a living benchmark available at https://tabarena.ai.


                                                                                        Default       Tuned          Tuned + Ensembled


                                               1600
                                                                AutoGluon 1.3 (4h)

                                               1400

                                         Elo
                                               1200


                                               1000


                                                800
                                                       Linear     ↑ RandomForest ↑ FastaiMLP    ↑     EBM       ↑ ModernNCA ↑     CatBoost    ↑    TabM    ↑
                                                                 KNN         ExtraTrees      TabDPT         TorchMLP      XGBoost         LightGBM      RealMLP


                                        Figure 1: TabArena-v0.1 Leaderboard. We evaluate models under default parameters, tuning, and
                                        weighted ensembling [1] of hyperparameters. Since TabICL and TabPFNv2 are not applicable to all
                                        datasets, we evaluate them on subsets of the benchmark in Figure 4 .


                                        39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.
1     Introduction
Benchmarking tabular machine learning models is an arduous and error-prone process. With the rise
of deep learning and foundation models for tabular data [2, 3, 4, 5, 6], benchmarking has become
even more challenging for researchers and practitioners alike. While several benchmarks have
been proposed in recent years, there is increasing skepticism towards data curation and evaluation
protocols utilized [7, 8, 9]. Most importantly, many datasets used in benchmarks are outdated, contain
problematic licenses, do not represent real tabular data tasks, or are biased through data leaks [7, 10].
Despite the growing awareness of such issues, benchmarks are rarely maintained after publication.
Issues uncovered in follow-up studies are not addressed, and baselines for the state-of-the-art are
stuck in time. Consequently, follow-up benchmarks reproduce shortcomings of prior work and do not
compare to the actual state-of-the-art [11].
To address these issues, we argue for a paradigm shift from the currently used static benchmarks
to a sustainable, living benchmarking system treated as software that is versioned, professionally
maintained, and gradually improved by the community as an open-source project. With this goal in
mind, we introduce TabArena.
TabArena is a living benchmarking system that makes benchmarking tabular machine learning
models a reliable experience. TabArena is realized through our four main contributions:
      ➢ We investigate 1053 datasets used in tabular data research and carefully, manually curate a
        set of 51 datasets out of these, representing real-world tabular data tasks.
      ➢ We curate 16 tabular machine learning models, including 3 tabular foundation models, and
        run large-scale experiments in well-tested modeling pipelines used in practice. In total, we
        trained ∼25 000 000 instances of models across all our experiments.
      ➢ We instantiate a public leaderboard available on tabarena.ai, release precomputed results
        for fast comparisons, and provide reproducible code to benchmark new methods.
      ➢ We assemble a team of maintainers from different institutions with experience in maintaining
        open-source initiatives to keep the living benchmark up to date.
In this paper, we detail our curation protocols for building a sophisticated living benchmark and
investigate the results of TabArena version 0.1, representing our initialization of the leaderboard.
TabArena-v0.1 Focus Statement. TabArena focuses on evaluating predictive machine learning
models for tabular data. Our long-term vision is to make TabArena representative for all use cases of
tabular data. For TabArena-v0.1, we initialize the benchmark focusing on the most common type
of tabular machine learning problem: Tabular classification and regression for independent and
identically distributed (IID) data, spanning the small to medium data regime. We explicitly
leave for future work use cases such as non-IID data (e.g., temporal dependencies, subject groups, or
distribution shifts); few-shot predictions, or very small data (e.g., less than 500 training samples); large
data (e.g., more than 250 000 training samples); or other machine learning tasks such as clustering,
anomaly detection, subgroup discovery, or survival analysis.
Our results demonstrate: (A) The best performance for individual tabular machine learning models
is generally achieved by post-hoc ensembling tuned hyperparameter configurations; (B) With tuning
and ensembling, the best deep learning methods are equal to or better than gradient-boosted decision
trees; (C) Tabular foundation models dominate for small data with strong in-context learning perfor-
mance even without tuning; (D) Ensemble pipelines leveraging various models are the state-of-the-art
for tabular data, but the best individual models do not contribute equally to the ensemble pipeline.

2     TabArena
TabArena is a living benchmark because of our protocols, which govern the curation of (2.1) models
and hyperparameter optimization, (2.2) datasets, and (2.3) evaluation design. Through continuous
application and refinement of these protocols, we ensure TabArena remains current and maintained.

2.1   Models and Hyperparameter Optimization Protocol

TabArena is implemented as an extendable platform to support a wide range of machine learning
models on tabular data. For instantiating TabArena, we curate 14 state-of-the-art (foundation) models


                                                     2
and two simple baselines. TabArena is created as a platform to benchmark each model to its full
potential. Therefore, every included model represents a well-known baseline or was implemented
in dialogue with the authors. Furthermore, we only run models on datasets within their restrictions
to represent them fairly. This only affects TabPFNv2, which is restricted to datasets with up to
10, 000 training samples, 500 features, and 10 classes for classification tasks, and TabICL, which is
constrained to classification tasks with up to 100, 000 training samples and 500 features.
TabArena models are powered by three components: (1) implementation in a well-tested modeling
framework used in real-world applications; (2) curated hyperparameter optimization protocols; (3)
improved validation and ensembling strategies, including ensembling over instances of a single model
class. Table 1 provides an overview of the models benchmarked in TabArena-v0.1.


Table 1: TabArena-v0.1 Models. We show all models included in our initialization of TabArena,
the source of the search space, and a short version of the name. Moreover, we specify the model
types: tree-based ( ), neural network ( ), pretrained foundation models ( ), and baseline ( ).
        Model                                      Short Name      Search Space        Type
       Random Forests [12]                         RandomForest      Prior Work + Us
       Extremely Randomized Trees [13]             ExtraTrees        Prior Work + Us
       XGBoost [14]                                XGBoost           Prior Work + Us
       LightGBM [15]                               LightGBM          Prior Work + Us
       CatBoost [16]                               CatBoost          Prior Work + Us
       Explainable Boosting Machine [17, 18]       EBM               Authors
       FastAI MLP [19]                             FastaiMLP         Authors
       Torch MLP [19]                              TorchMLP          Authors
       RealMLP [20]                                RealMLP           Authors
       TabM†mini [9]                               TabM              Authors
       ModernNCA [21]                              ModernNCA         Authors
       TabPFNv2 [5]                                TabPFNv2          Authors
       TabICL [22]                                 TabICL            -
       TabDPT [23]                                 TabDPT            -
       Linear / Logistic Regression                Linear            Prior Work + Us
       K-Nearest Neighbors                         KNN               Prior Work + Us

Implementation Framework. For implementing models, we rely on functionalities from Au-
toGluon [19], an established machine learning framework used in practical applications. Each
model is implemented within the standardized AbstractModel framework, which aligns with the
scikit-learn [24] API, and includes: (1) model-agnostic preprocessing, (2) support for (inner) cross-
validation with ensembling, (3) hyperparameter optimization, (4) evaluation metrics, (5) fold-wise
training parallelization, (6) (customizable) model-specific preprocessing pipeline, (7) (customiz-
able) early stopping and validation logic, and (8) unit tests. As a result, any model implemented in
TabArena can be readily deployed for real-world use cases or within predictive machine learning
systems. Moreover, the pipeline logic encompassing models within TabArena is implemented in
a tested framework regularly used in real-world applications. Appendix C.1 summarizes further
implementation details, and Appendix E.2 includes a detailed protocol for contributing models.
Cross-validation and Post-hoc Ensembles. As can be seen in various Kaggle competitions and
academic studies, cf. [8, 20, 25, 26], for most datasets, peak performance requires ensembling
strategies. Therefore, we default to using 8-fold cross-validation (with class-wise stratification for
classification) and then employ cross-validation ensembles [27]; which we describe in detail in
Appendix C.3. For all foundation models, we refit on training and validation data instead of using
cross-validation ensembles, following recommendations from the authors of TabPFN and TabICL. In
addition, we evaluate each tunable model using post-hoc ensembling [1] of different hyperparameter
configurations, denoted as Tuned + Ensembled; further details are provided in Appendix C.4.
Hyperparameter Optimization.          For each model, we curate a strong hyperparameter search
space; for full details, see Appendix C.2. Where possible, we started with the search spaces from
the original paper and finalized them in dialogue with the models’ authors. Otherwise, we curated


                                                  3
Table 2: Comparison of Tabular Benchmarks. We systematically compare prior tabular benchmark
studies across six characteristics. Inner and outer splits: the number of splits used for inner or
outer validation: 1 for holdout validation; - if the benchmark does not specify; and any other number
specifies the total number of splits from (repeated) cross-validation. If a set is given, the benchmark
uses different splits for different datasets. Ensembling: Whether the benchmark studies ensembling
of configurations for individual models (✓), uses any other ensembling ((✓)), or uses no ensembling
at all (✗). Manual Curation: Whether the benchmark filters datasets based on criteria beyond simple
automation, (✓) or not (✗). Datasets remaining: the number of datasets remaining after filtering by
our criteria. Results available: Whether the benchmark shares no re-usable results (✗), only metric
results ((✓)), or metric results and predictions (✓). HPO Limit: How hyperparameter optimization
was limited in the number of configurations and/or hours.
                                  #splits                        Manual #datasets Results       HPO Limit
Benchmark                     inner       outer       Ensembling curation remaining available #confs. #hours
Bischl et al. [28, 29]          -          10             ✗         ✓        9/72      (✓)       -      -
Gorishniy et al. [30]           1           1            (✓)        ✓        1/11       ✗      100      6
Shwartz-Ziv and Armon [31]      1        {1, 3}          (✓)        ✗         1/11      ✗     1000      -
Grinsztajn et al. [32]          1      {1, 2, 3, 5}       ✗         ✓       12/47      (✓)     400      -
McElfresh et al. [33]           1          10             ✗         ✗       13/196     (✓)      30     10
Fischer et al. [34]        {1, 3, 10} {1, 10, 100}        ✗         ✓         8/35     (✓)   {-, 500}   -
Gijsbers et al. [35]            -          10            (✓)        ✓       15/104     (✓)       -      4
Kohli et al. [7]               1            1             ✗         ✓       17/187      ✗      100    {3, -}
Tschalzev et al. [8]           10           1            (✓)        ✓        1/10       ✗      100      -
Holzmüller et al. [20]          1          10            (✓)        ✓       10/118      ✓       50      -
Ye et al. [36]                 1            1             ✗         ✗       39/300     (✓)     100      -
Rubachev et al. [10]            1           1            (✓)        ✓         0/8      (✓)     100      -
Salinas and Erickson [37]       8           3             ✓         ✗       19/200      ✓      200     200
TabArena (Ours)                 8       {9, 30}           ✓         ✓        51/51      ✓      200     200



search spaces from prior work. We evaluate 1 default and a fixed set of 200 randomly-sampled
hyperparameter configurations for all models, except for TabICL and TabDPT. TabICL and TabDPT
do not specify hyperparameter optimization (HPO) in the original paper and implementation; thus,
we restrict ourselves to evaluating only their default performance. Each hyperparameter configuration
is validated using 8-fold (inner) cross-validation. We use the score of this (inner) cross-validation to
select the best hyperparameter configuration.
For practical reasons, we restrict the time to evaluate one configuration on one train split of a dataset
to 1 hour. Our analysis in Appendix A.2 shows that this limit rarely takes effect.
In a living benchmark, we expect users with different hardware to submit to the leaderboard. Thus,
we do not constrain the hardware used to evaluate a configuration. We log the hardware used during
benchmarking to enable analysis of the impact of computing power. Our recommended hardware for
evaluating a configuration is 8 CPU cores, 32 GB of RAM, and 100 GB of disk space. Furthermore,
we recommend using 1 GPU with 48 GB VRAM for GPU-scaling models, such as foundation models.

2.2   Datasets Protocol

Many existing benchmarks were curated using semi-automated procedures to collect datasets ac-
cording to simple characteristics, often to obtain as many datasets as possible. In contrast, we
reject the notion of automatically collecting datasets without any sanity check. Instead, we focus
on carefully, manually curating a representative collection of datasets. Although some previous
benchmarks manually curated data, most of the included datasets do not meet the criteria of IID
predictive tabular datasets, as seen in Table 2. Our work indicates a turning point with the most
extensive and conscientious manual curation effort for machine learning on IID tabular data so far.
We define criteria for data selection according to our focus statement and filter 1053 datasets used
in 14 prior benchmarks accordingly. Figure 2 describes our selection process. Notably, only the
deduplication step and size filters can be automated. Faithfully applying the other criteria requires
manual human effort per-dataset, demonstrating the downsides of automated data curation procedures.
Dataset Selection Criteria. We comprehensively describe our selection criteria in Appendix B.1.
In short, we selected datasets that fulfilled the following requirements: (1) The dataset and its
predictive machine learning task are unique within our benchmark; (2) The dataset is IID, that is, a
random split is appropriate for the underlying original task; (3) The dataset is not from a non-tabular


                                                         4
Figure 2: Data Curation Results. The figure shows why and how many datasets we filter based on
our criteria. We filter datasets that are duplicates, not from a tabular domain, not a real predictive
task, tiny, have quality or license issues, and are not IID.


modality, such as images, where it is unclear whether tabular machine learning is a reasonable
alternative to domain-specific methods; (4) The dataset stems from a real random distribution, and
is not generated, e.g., from a deterministic function; (5) The dataset was published explicitly for a
predictive modeling task in a real-world application; (6) The dataset is small-to-medium-sized, i.e., it
has at least 500 and at most 250 000 train samples; (7) We can use a version of the dataset without
pre-applied problematic preprocessing, such as irreversible data leaks; (8) The dataset was originally
published with a license allowing for scientific usage; (9) The dataset and its structured metadata can
be automatically downloaded via a public API, or we are allowed to upload the dataset to a public
API; (10) The dataset and its predictive task do not raise (obvious) ethical concerns.
As several criteria involve subjective judgment and human interpretation, we publicly share our
curation insights at tabarena.ai/dataset-curation, including per-dataset notes detailing our
observations, identified characteristics, and final assessments. To enhance the quality of TabArena’s
datasets, we actively encourage the community to review and critique our evaluations.

                                        Task                              License                                                                                  100
                      30




                                                                                                                                                                         Percentage (%) of Categorical Features
 Number of Datasets
                                                                                                                    1000
                      20                                                                                                                                           80




                                                                                               Number of Features
                      10
                                                                                                                                                                   60
                       0                                                                                            100
                           Binary     Regression Multiclass   CC BY 4.0    Public    Other

                                      Source                               Age                                                                                     40
                      30




 Number of Datasets
                      20                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                      10

                      10
                                                                                                                                                                   0
                       0
                                                                                                                               1000        10000          100000
                           UCI      Kaggle OpenML Other       0-5 Years 6-15 Years 16+ Years                                          Number of Samples


Figure 3: Characteristics of Datasets in TabArena. On the left, we show the number of datasets per
task type, license, source of the dataset, and age group. On the right, we show the number of features
(columns) and samples (rows), as well as the percentage of categorical features per dataset.

Figure 3 summarizes dataset characteristics; we share per-dataset details and domain coverage in
Appendix B.2. Throughout our curation process, we noticed two trends. First, across benchmarks,
the versions of datasets were often inconsistent. Benchmarks used the same name and source for a
dataset, but with different preprocessing, features, or even targets. Thus, dataset-specific performance
comparisons across benchmarks were often invalid. Second, the number of datasets that are truly
suitable for benchmarking IID tabular data approaches is surprisingly small after carefully inspecting
the tasks represented by datasets. We share more noteworthy observations in Appendix B.3.
Call for Data Contributions. TabArena is a living benchmark, and the datasets we curated are a
significant part of this living, continuously maintained system. As mentioned above, we invite the
community to scrutinize our curation efforts. Moreover, to keep TabArena up-to-date, we implore
the broader scientific community to share their tabular data publicly. We are also actively looking for
contributions of data outside of TabArena-v0.1’s focus, i.e., data that is non-IID, tiny, or large, as
well as tasks where extracing features from other modalities is still considered a reasonable approach.


                                                                                                                           5
Likewise, we invite the community to curate additional existing datasets. We provide a detailed
protocol to contribute a new dataset to TabArena in Appendix E.3.

2.3   Evaluation Design Protocol

The TabArena leaderboard aims to assess the state-of-the-art for predictive machine learning on
tabular data. With this in mind, we design the evaluation to produce a reliable and representative
leaderboard. To guard against randomness in the data and method significantly impacting our
conclusions, we repeat our experiments per dataset. We detail the various sources of randomness in
TabArena in Appendix D.2. We employ a dataset-specific repetition strategy using more repeats for
smaller datasets and fewer for larger datasets, because the significance of randomness decreases with
dataset size. The strategy is as follows: (I) for datasets with less than 2 500 samples, we use 10 times
repeated 3-fold outer cross-validation; (II) for all other datasets, we use 3 repeats. For classification
tasks, we use class-wise stratified cross-validation.
Evaluation Metric. We evaluate models using the Elo rating system [38]. Elo is a pairwise
comparison-based rating system where each model’s rating predicts its expected win probability
against others, with a 400-point Elo gap corresponding to a 10 to 1 (91%) expected win rate. We
calibrate 1000 Elo to the performance of our default random forest configuration across all figures,
and perform 200 rounds of bootstrapping to obtain 95% confidence intervals, similar to Chiang et al.
[39], see Appendix D.1. In our main results, Elo scores are computed using ROC AUC for binary
classification, log-loss for multiclass classification, and RMSE for regression.
We aim to provide a ranking of models as part of TabArena. Every aggregation metric used for
ranking has its own pitfalls, and none is perfect; however, we argue that Elo aligns most closely
with our goals and has therefore been selected as our primary evaluation metric. Elo is based on
pairwise comparison scoring, which only considers wins, ties, or losses and neglects the magnitude
of performance differences. This can be a disadvantage, as minor performance differences may be
considered irrelevant by practitioners in some applications. At the same time, this means that each
dataset contributes equally to Elo, hence the aggregation is not biased towards certain domains or
dataset properties (e.g., small or non-noisy datasets). For TabArena, this is a key advantage because
we want to create a benchmark whose results are representative of all domains and datasets.
While we use Elo as our primary evaluation metric, we also track and present additional aggregation
metrics in Section 3 and on the leaderboard. Users can re-rank the leaderboard according to alternative
metrics, such as Improvability. Improvability measures the performance of methods relative to the
best method, and is therefore sensitive to the magnitude of performance differences; see Appendix A.1
for details. We also share scripts to generate the leaderboard, evaluation plots, and inspect the results.
TabArena Reference Pipeline. Following the recommendations of Tschalzev et al. [11], we in-
clude a reference pipeline in our benchmark. This reference pipeline is applied independently of the
tuning protocol and constraints we constructed for models within TabArena. It aims to represent the
performance easily achievable by a practitioner on a dataset.
We select the predictive machine learning system AutoGluon [19] (version 1.3, with the
best_quality preset and 4 hours for training) as the first official TabArena reference pipeline.
Additional Metadata.        Next to the main results, we save an extensive amount of additional
metadata to enable future research and deeper model studies. We save the training time, inference
time, precomputed results for various metrics, hyperparameters, hardware specification, and model
predictions. We save the validation and test predictions of the final model, and of all models trained
per-fold during inner cross-validation.
Living Benchmark. TabArena marks the start of an open-source initiative towards a continuously
updated, collectively shared assessment of the state-of-the-art in tabular machine learning. Therefore,
as one of the most crucial parts of TabArena, we define a protocol for researchers and practitioners
to submit models to the live leaderboard. The protocol is detailed in Appendix E.4


3     Results

To initialize the leaderboard, we run 16 curated models (Section 2.1) on 51 curated datasets (Sec-
tion 2.2) within TabArena’s evaluation design (Section 2.3). Likewise, we evaluate AutoGluon, the
reference pipeline, on all datasets. We run TabM, ModernNCA, and the foundation models on GPU


                                                    6
          Default          Tuned                Tuned + Ensembled                   Default         Tuned           Tuned + Ensembled


     TabPFNv2                                                                      TabM
      RealMLP                                                                  RealMLP
          TabM                                                                   TabICL
     LightGBM                                                                 LightGBM
      CatBoost                                                                 CatBoost
      XGBoost                                                                  XGBoost
   ModernNCA                                                                ModernNCA
       TabDPT                                                                 TorchMLP
           EBM                                                                      EBM
     TorchMLP                                                                 FastaiMLP
     FastaiMLP                                                                  TabDPT
     ExtraTrees                                                               ExtraTrees
  RandomForest                                                             RandomForest
         Linear                                                                   Linear
           KNN                 AutoGluon 1.3 (4h)                                   KNN                       AutoGluon 1.3 (4h)
                  800   1000      1200         1400    1600     1800                       800   1000       1200     1400      1600
                                         Elo                                                                  Elo


Figure 4: Leaderboard for TabPFNv2-compatible (left) and TabICL-compatible (right) datasets.
For TabPFNv2, we obtain 33 datasets (≤ 10K training samples, ≤ 500 features). For TabICL, we
obtain 36 classification datasets (≤ 100K, ≤ 500). Everything but the datasets is identical to Figure 1.


and all other models, as well as AutoGluon, on CPU. We give all runs 32 GB of RAM and 100 GB of
disk space. We perform CPU runs in the cloud via Amazon Web Services on an M6i.2xlarge EC2
instance (eight cores Intel Xeon CPU). We perform GPU runs on an NVIDIA L40S with 48 GB
VRAM and eight cores of an AMD EPYC 9334 CPU. Based on our logs, the compute time for all our
experiments without parallelization, including overhead such as scheduling, is ∼15 wall-clock years.

3.1   Assessing Peak Performance: The TabArena-v0.1 Leaderboard

Figure 1 shows our main results, the leaderboard of TabArena-v0.1, which includes the performance
of methods with default parameters, a single configuration on validation data after hyperparameter
tuning, and weighted post-hoc ensembling [1] of different hyperparameter configurations. Further-
more, we present one leaderboard encompassing all models in Appendix A.1, where we impute
missing datasets, representing the live leaderboard available on tabarena.ai. To provide a wide
range of perspectives, we also share additional versions of the leaderboard in Appendix A.1, such as
using alternative metrics or task-wise dataset subsets. Finally, we analyze the statistical significance
of our comparison in Appendix A.5.
Post-Hoc Ensembled Deep Learning Models Dominate the Leaderboard. In line with previous
work [33], CatBoost is ranked first in the conventional tuning regime (Figure 1). However, the
TabArena-v0.1 leaderboard reveals that after post-hoc ensembling, neural networks are the strongest
single models on average in TabArena-v0.1. Our results show that the peak performance of models
is misrepresented unless post-hoc ensembling is used. This is evident in the observation that the top
three models in our leaderboard (TabM, LightGBM, RealMLP; see Figure 1) would all be worse
than the actual fourth-best model (CatBoost) without post-hoc ensembling. While practitioners must
trade off the increased predictive performance with the increased inference cost (see Figure 6) [40],
peak performance requires post-hoc ensembling. Furthermore, this shows that compared to existing
benchmarks, TabArena is closer to correctly representing the currently achievable peak performance.
Tabular Foundation Models Lead on Small Datasets. As most foundation models are currently
limited in their applicability, we evaluate them separately in Figure 4, presenting the leaderboard
after restricting the datasets to the constraints of TabPFNv2 or TabICL. TabPFNv2 outperforms
related approaches by a large margin, establishing tabular foundation models as the go-to solution for
datasets within their constraints. Moreover, TabPFNv2 with tuning and post-hoc ensembling again
outperforms AutoGluon, confirming the results by Hollmann et al. [5]. We expect tabular foundation
models with wider applicability to be released and included in future versions of TabArena.
Pareto Fronts and Tuning Trajectories Reveal Efficiency Tradeoffs. The Pareto front of improv-
ability and inference time in Figure 5 (left) reveals that tuned EBM (EBM-T) and tuned CatBoost
(CatBoost-T) shine at inference time. The next Pareto points with strong improvements come with
an increase in inference time of ∼ 15× for TabM-TE and ∼ 100× for RealMLP-TE. Figure 5


                                                                       7
(right) shows that gradient-boosted trees have strong performance given their training cost. RealMLP
only starts to dominate them after a considerable amount of training time with an ensemble of 25+
configurations. For additional discussion of the tuning trajectories, see Appendix A.6.

                     22.5                                                  Default              RandomForest                                                                                       RandomForest
                                                                           Tuned                ExtraTrees                                                                                         ExtraTrees
                                                                           Tuned + Ens.         EBM                                    25.0                                                        EBM
                     20.0                                                  Pareto Front         FastaiMLP                                                                                          FastaiMLP
                                                                                                TabDPT                                                                                             TabDPT
                                                                                                TorchMLP                               22.5                                                        TorchMLP
                                                                                                XGBoost




 Improvability (%)                                                                                                 Improvability (%)
                     17.5                                                                       LightGBM                                                                                           XGBoost
                                                                                                ModernNCA                              20.0                                                        LightGBM
                                                                                                CatBoost                                                                                           ModernNCA
                     15.0                                                                       TabM                                                                                               CatBoost
                                                                                                RealMLP                                17.5                                                        TabM
                                                                                                                                                                                                   RealMLP
                     12.5                                                                                                              15.0

                     10.0                                                                                                              12.5

                      7.5                                                                                                              10.0

                                                                                                                                        7.5    al
                      5.0
                             al                                                                                                               tim
                            tim                                                                                                               Op
                            Op

                                          10 1                              100                              101                                100           101             102            103              104
                            Inference time per 1K samples (s) (median)                                                                         Train time per 1K samples (s) (median)
Figure 5: (Left) Pareto front of improvability and inference time. We report the median inference
time per 1000 samples across all datasets. (Right) Improvability tuning trajectories. Time is shown
as the tuning time with points from left to right marking ensembles of increasing numbers of random
configurations (1, 2, 5, 10, 25, 50, 100, 150, 201). The trajectories are sampled 20 times from all
trials and averaged. The right-most highlighted points use all configurations.


3.2                   Holistic Benchmarking of Peak Performance with TabArena

In this subsection, we demonstrate how the design choices behind TabArena enable users to assess
peak performance and evaluate the utility of models in ensembling pipelines.
Abandoning the Holdout Validation Fallacy. The rich metadata we save for TabArena allows
us to study what-if cases for our evaluation design. Figure 6 shows that when using holdout
validation instead of cross-validation for model selection, all models are greatly underestimated, and
performance is biased in favor of models that already use ensembling. This aligns with prior work
[11, 41, 42] and demonstrates the importance of nested cross-validation in our benchmark design.
Reducing Time and Hardware Constraints for Accurate Benchmarking. While TabArena
enables a more accurate assessment of peak performance, it does so at a non-negligible computational
cost. We hypothesize that prior benchmarks did not assess peak performance mainly due to time
and hardware constraints. Thus, we share our result artifact to reduce time and hardware constraints
for accurate benchmarking. As a result, users can cheaply compare novel models, and simulated


                                                               Default              Tuned + Ensembled                                         Tuned + Ensembled (Holdout)            Tuned + Ensembled

                                                      Train+val time                      Inference time

                                 KNN (CPU)
                                                                                                                                 RealMLP
                           ExtraTrees (CPU)                                                                                          TabM
                        RandomForest (CPU)                                                                                      LightGBM
                               Linear (CPU)
                                                                                                                                 CatBoost
                            XGBoost (CPU)
                           LightGBM (CPU)                                                                                        XGBoost
                           TabPFNv2 (GPU)                                                                                     ModernNCA
                           FastaiMLP (CPU)
                                                                                                                                TorchMLP
                                 EBM (CPU)
                            CatBoost (CPU)                                                                                            EBM
                              TabICL (GPU)                                                                                      FastaiMLP
                           TorchMLP (CPU)                                                                                       ExtraTrees
                                TabM (GPU)
                         ModernNCA (GPU)                                                                                     RandomForest
                            RealMLP (CPU)                                                                                           Linear                                  AutoGluon 1.3 (4h)
                             TabDPT (GPU)
                                                                                                                                                      800    1000      1200         1400     1600
                                                  1     10   100   1000   10000
                                              Median time per 1K samples [s]
                                                                                       0.1      1       10
                                                                                  Median time per 1K samples [s]
                                                                                                                                                                            Elo


Figure 6: (Left) Model Efficiency. Median training times with cross-validation across TabPFNv2-
and TabICL-compatible datasets (see Figure 4). (Right) Holdout vs. Cross-Validation. Predictive
performance of a model with tuning and ensembling when using holdout or cross-validation.


                                                                                                                   8
ensembles thereof, to existing models and ensemble pipelines (see Appendix E.1).
Furthermore, we introduce and continually maintain TabArena-Lite, a subset of TabArena that
consists of all datasets with one outer fold (see Appendix A.4). We intend TabArena-Lite to be
used in academic studies and find any novel model that significantly outperforms other models on at
least one dataset, even if it is not the state-of-the-art on average, worthy of publication.
Ensembles Across Models and Individual Contributions. While our public leaderboard primar-
ily ranks models, we want to raise awareness that this is a limited perspective that wrongly suggests
that lower-ranked models are unnecessary. In Figure 7 (left), we show that a simulated ensembling
pipeline using all models in TabArena outperforms all individual models and AutoGluon, further
advancing the state-of-the-art. In Figure 7 (right), we show the average weights of different models
in the TabArena ensemble. Notably, models with the highest performance on the leaderboard are not
necessarily the ones with the highest weights, likely because the ensemble construction favors models
overfitting the validation data [43, 44], such as ModernNCA and RealMLP as seen in Appendix A.6.
A Sober Look at the “GBDT vs. Deep Learning” Debate. Prior benchmarks dedicated an
enormous amount of work toward debating whether gradient-based decision trees (GBDTs) or deep
learning is better across benchmarks and model studies [31, 32, 33]. We argue that the battle between
GBDTs and deep learning is a false dichotomy, as both model families contribute to ensembles that
strongly outperform individual model families (Figure 7). Thus, we posit that it is more important
to find new models that work well in ensembles than models that beat GBDTs. TabArena enables
such research by allowing users to simulate ensemble performance per and across models based on
our precomputed result artifacts. Finally, we hypothesize that a major reason for practitioners to
rely on GBDTs instead of deep learning is the insufficient code quality and maintenance of deep
learning methods compared to GBDT frameworks [45]. TabArena also tackles this problem by
wrapping existing deep learning methods in an easy-to-use interface, see Appendix E.5. However,
other reasons may also contribute to the slow adoption of deep learning methods, such as longer
training time (especially on CPU), the lack of some functionalities, habit, the existence of more
educational material for GBDTs, and overclaims of deep learning performance in academic papers.

             Default             Tuned           Tuned + Ensembled
                                                                      ModernNCA
                                                                         RealMLP
        RealMLP                                                           TabDPT
            TabM                                                       FastaiMLP
       LightGBM                                                          CatBoost
        CatBoost                                                        TorchMLP
        XGBoost                                                             TabM
     ModernNCA                                                          TabPFNv2
       TorchMLP                                                      RandomForest
         TabDPT                                                        LightGBM
             EBM                                                          TabICL
       FastaiMLP                                                             EBM

       ExtraTrees                                                            KNN

    RandomForest                                                         XGBoost

             KNN                  AutoGluon 1.3 (4h)                    ExtraTrees

           Linear                   TabArena ensemble (4h)                  Linear

                                                                                 0.00   0.05   0.10   0.15   0.20   0.25   0.30   0.35
                    800   1000      1200    1400     1600     1800                        Average weight in TabArena ensemble
                                           Elo
Figure 7: (Left) TabArena Ensemble. Simulated performance of an ensemble using all models
in TabArena compared to the leaderboard from Figure 1. (Right) Individual Contributions.
Contributions of models to the TabArena ensemble in terms of average weight across all datasets.


4   Related Work
Many tabular benchmarks have been proposed over the recent years, including OpenML-CC18
[28], PMLB(Mini) [46, 47, 48], the Grinsztajn et al. [32] benchmark, TabZilla [33], the AutoML
Benchmark [35], TabRepo [37], Tschalzev et al. [8], TabRed [10], the Zabërgja et al. [49] benchmark,
and TALENT [50]. In addition, many studies used their own, alternative evaluation frameworks
[5, 9, 20, 26, 30, 51]. This shows that the community does not have a consistent shared understanding
of how to benchmark tabular models and, more importantly, no platform to align and collectively
improve benchmarking efforts. TabArena aims to provide both.
Recent studies revealed further flaws in tabular benchmarking: datasets are often outdated [7], non-IID


                                                                 9
data is used inappropriately [10], many datasets are not originally tabular [7, 10], and inappropriate
evaluation protocols are frequent [8, 11]. TabArena addresses these concerns through extensive data
curation efforts and evaluation in sophisticated ensembling pipelines. As seen in Table 2, TabArena
consolidates the individually outstanding aspects of previous benchmarks.
While some existing tabular benchmarks outline guidelines and commit to adding datasets or models,
none include maintenance protocols or have been updated to address issues discovered in data and
evaluation quality. To the best of our knowledge, the AutoML benchmark [35] and the TALENT
benchmark [36] are the most similar to the vision of TabArena; both benchmarks received updates
and are actively maintained. TabArena is the first living tabular benchmark for machine learning
models with active maintenance protocols and a public leaderboard for tabular data.
Our work is inspired by benchmarking efforts from other domains, such as ChatBot Arena [39],
RewardBench [52], LiveBench [53], the Huggingface Open LLM Leaderboard [54, 55], and GIFT-
Eval [56]. The most significant similarity between these efforts and TabArena is that we also provide
a live leaderboard. Otherwise, TabArena is clearly distinct through our focus on predictive machine
learning for tabular data and the resulting differences in models, datasets, and evaluation design.

5   Conclusion
We introduced TabArena, the first living benchmark for machine learning on small to medium-
sized tabular data. We described the core components of TabArena: models and hyperparameter
optimization, datasets, and evaluation design protocols. As part of TabArena, we share rich metadata
and reproducible code with the community, allowing the community to benchmark and evaluate
new models in a standardized way. We then instantiated TabArena by curating 16 models and 51
representative real-world tabular data tasks out of 1053 available datasets for running a large-scale
benchmark consisting of ∼25 000 000 individual runs that took ∼15 years of wall-clock time. To the
best of our knowledge, our results are the most representative assessment of the state-of-the-art for
tabular data to date. We found that deep learning models such as TabM and RealMLP, as well as
foundation models for small data, perform similar to or better than gradient-boosted decision trees.
Moreover, post-hoc ensembling per model and across models can dramatically improve performance.
Limitations and Societal Impact. As we envision a living benchmarking system that will evolve
over time, some limitations can be seen as future work, while others stem from fundamental trade-offs
in benchmark design choices. Our (current) limitations are: (1) We use a fixed set of 200 random
hyperparameter configurations to enable the study of ensemble pipelines. This prevents analyzing
the variance of random hyperparameter choices [57] and studying more advanced hyperparameter
optimization strategies. (2) We use a time limit per configuration; thus, our results depend on the
hardware used in edge cases where the time limit is reached. Using different hardware across models
(and in the future across users) reduces the comparability in such cases. (3) Our strict selection
criteria for datasets makes TabArena more representative for real-world use-cases, but reduces the
number of datasets drastically. We emphasize the need to work with the community to curate a more
representative, high-quality collection of datasets with more diversity and statistical power. (4) Lastly,
we assess predictive performance without feature engineering on top of the existing dataset state.
Feature engineering could further boost predictive performance and change the model ranking.
A fundamental limitation of open-source benchmarking is that foul play or dataset contamination
could compromise the leaderboard. Model providers could overfit the hyperparameters of their model
on the TabArena datasets, or use them for pretraining a foundation model. We posit that keeping the
TabArena alive is the best way to handle these challenges; see Appendix E.6 for a discussion.
Our work has a broader positive societal impact by improving the trustworthiness and reliability of
academic benchmarks. Moreover, TabArena provides practical guidance to practitioners for small-
to medium-sized IID tabular data. Lastly, while the upfront computational costs of TabArena imply
a negative environmental impact, we argue that our secondary contributions, such as sharing result
artifacts, will offset the negative environmental impact; we elaborate on this in Appendix D.3.
Future Work. Our vision for TabArena-v1.0 is a sophisticated benchmark for classification and
regression for any tabular dataset for the entire community. Our specific next steps towards this goal
are: supporting tiny, large, and non-IID data, integrating new models, and curating more datasets.
To conclude, TabArena is a significant step towards making benchmarking tabular machine learning
models a straightforward and reliable process. We look forward to seeing our living benchmark grow
and evolve in cooperation with the tabular machine learning community.


                                                   10
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
We thank the authors of all models with whom we were in contact for feedback and code contributions
regarding the implementations of their models, namely, not among the authors of this manuscript:
Yury Gorishniy; Paul Koch; Jingang Qu; and Han-Jia Ye. Furthermore, we thank the dataset donors
for sharing their data, especially those under a public license. Moreover, we thank the community,
particularly OpenML, Kaggle, and Hugging Face, for developing tools that facilitate the sharing
of tabular data. Finally, we thank the reviewers for their constructive feedback and contribution to
improving the paper.
L.P. acknowledges funding by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foun-
dation) under SFB 1597 (SmallData), grant number 499552394. A.T. acknowledges funding by the
Ministry of Economic Affairs, Labour and Tourism Baden-Württemberg. F.H. acknowledges the
financial support of the Hector Foundation. This research was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsge-
meinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under grant number 539134284, through EFRE
(FEIH_2698644) and the state of Baden-Württemberg.




Author Contributions
N.E. led the code development, co-led the model curation, led the CPU experiments, contributed to
writing the paper, contributed to the management of the collaboration, led the evaluation, and co-led
visualizations. L.P. contributed to the code development, contributed to the model curation, led the
GPU experiments, led the writing of the paper, led the management of the collaboration, co-led the
dataset curation, contributed to the evaluation, and contributed to the visualizations. A.T. helped
with the code development, co-led the dataset curation, contributed to writing the paper, contributed
to the evaluation, and contributed to the visualizations. D.H. contributed to the code development,
co-led the model curation, contributed to writing the paper, contributed to the evaluation, and co-led
visualizations. P.M.D. contributed to the code development. D.S. helped with visualizations, helped
with supervising the project, and contributed to reviewing and editing the paper. F.H. supervised L.P.
and helped with reviewing and editing the paper.

Competing Interests
D.H. is one of the authors of RealMLP and one of the authors of TabICL. D.S. and N.E. are the
authors of TabRepo. N.E., L.P., and P.M.D. are developers of AutoGluon, and in extension, the
current maintainers of FastAI MLP and Torch MLP. L.P. and F.H. are a subset of the authors of
TabPFNv2. L.P. is an OpenML core contributor. F.H. is affiliated with PriorLabs, a company focused
on developing tabular foundation models. The authors declare no other competing interests.

References
  [1] R. Caruana, A. Niculescu-Mizil, G. Crew, and A. Ksikes. Ensemble selection from libraries of
      models. In R. Greiner, editor, Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Machine
      Learning (ICML’04). Omnipress, 2004.
  [2] V. Borisov, T. Leemann, K. Seßler, J. Haug, M. Pawelczyk, and G. Kasneci. Deep neural
      networks and tabular data: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
      Systems, 2022.
  [3] B. van Breugel and M. van der Schaar. Why tabular foundation models should be a research
      priority. In R. Salakhutdinov, Z. Kolter, K. Heller, A. Weller, N. Oliver, J. Scarlett, and
      F. Berkenkamp, editors, Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning
      (ICML’24), volume 251 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 2024.
  [4] M. Herrmann, F. Lange, K. Eggensperger, G. Casalicchio, M. Wever, M. Feurer, D. Rügamer,
      E. Hüllermeier, A.-L. Boulesteix, and B. Bischl. Position: Why we must rethink empirical
      research in machine learning. In R. Salakhutdinov, Z. Kolter, K. Heller, A. Weller, N. Oliver,


                                                 11
     J. Scarlett, and F. Berkenkamp, editors, Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on
     Machine Learning (ICML’24), volume 251 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
     pages 18228–18247. PMLR, 2024.
 [5] N. Hollmann, S. Müller, L. Purucker, A. Krishnakumar, M. Körfer, Shi Bin Hoo, Robin Tibor
     Schirrmeister, and Frank Hutter. Accurate predictions on small data with a tabular foundation
     model. Nature, 637(8045):319–326, 2025.
 [6] Jun-Peng Jiang, Si-Yang Liu, Hao-Run Cai, Qile Zhou, and Han-Jia Ye. Representation
     learning for tabular data: A comprehensive survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16109, 2025.
 [7] R. Kohli, M. Feurer, B. Bischl, K. Eggensperger, and F. Hutter. Towards quantifying the effect
     of datasets for benchmarking: A look at tabular machine learning. In Data-centric Machine
     Learning Research Workshop at the International Conference on Learning Representations,
     2024.
 [8] Andrej Tschalzev, Sascha Marton, Stefan Lüdtke, Christian Bartelt, and Heiner Stuckenschmidt.
     A data-centric perspective on evaluating machine learning models for tabular data. In The
     Thirty-eight Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks
     Track, 2024.
 [9] Yury Gorishniy, Akim Kotelnikov, and Artem Babenko. Tabm: Advancing tabular deep
     learning with parameter-efficient ensembling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24210, 2024.
[10] Ivan Rubachev, Nikolay Kartashev, Yury Gorishniy, and Artem Babenko. Tabred: Ana-
     lyzing pitfalls and filling the gaps in tabular deep learning benchmarks. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2406.19380, 2024.
[11] Andrej Tschalzev, Lennart Purucker, Stefan Lüdtke, Frank Hutter, Christian Bartelt, and Heiner
     Stuckenschmidt. Unreflected use of tabular data repositories can undermine research quality.
     In The Future of Machine Learning Data Practices and Repositories at ICLR 2025, 2025.
[12] L. Breiman. Random forests. 45:5–32, 2001.
[13] P. Geurts, D. Ernst, and L. Wehenkel. Extremely randomized trees. 63(1):3–42, 2006.
[14] T. Chen and C. Guestrin. XGBoost: A scalable tree boosting system. In B. Krishnapuram,
     M. Shah, A. Smola, C. Aggarwal, D. Shen, and R. Rastogi, editors, Proceedings of the 22nd
     ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD’16),
     pages 785–794, 2016.
[15] G. Ke, Q. Meng, T. Finley, T. Wang, W. Chen, W. Ma, Q. Ye, and T.-Y. Liu. Lightgbm: A highly
     efficient gradient boosting decision tree. In I. Guyon, U. von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach,
     R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, editors, Proceedings of the 31st International
     Conference on Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS’17), 2017.
[16] L. Prokhorenkova, G. Gusev, A. Vorobev, A. Dorogush, and A. Gulin. Catboost: Unbiased
     boosting with categorical features. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman,
     N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett, editors, Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS’18), page 6639–6649, 2018.
[17] Yin Lou, Rich Caruana, Johannes Gehrke, and Giles Hooker. Accurate intelligible models
     with pairwise interactions. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGKDD international conference
     on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 623–631, 2013.
[18] Harsha Nori, Samuel Jenkins, Paul Koch, and Rich Caruana. Interpretml: A unified framework
     for machine learning interpretability. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.09223, 2019.
[19] N. Erickson, J. Mueller, A. Shirkov, H. Zhang, P. Larroy, M. Li, and A. Smola. Autogluon-
     tabular: Robust and accurate automl for structured data. arXiv:2003.06505 [stat.ML], 2020.
[20] David Holzmüller, Léo Grinsztajn, and Ingo Steinwart. Better by default: Strong pre-tuned
     mlps and boosted trees on tabular data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
     37:26577–26658, 2024.
[21] Han-Jia Ye, Huai-Hong Yin, and De-Chuan Zhan. Modern neighborhood components analysis:
     A deep tabular baseline two decades later. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.03257, 2024.
[22] Jingang Qu, David Holzmüller, Gaël Varoquaux, and Marine Le Morvan. Tabicl: A tabular
     foundation model for in-context learning on large data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.05564,
     2025.


                                               12
[23] Junwei Ma, Valentin Thomas, Rasa Hosseinzadeh, Hamidreza Kamkari, Alex Labach, Jesse C
     Cresswell, Keyvan Golestan, Guangwei Yu, Maksims Volkovs, and Anthony L Caterini.
     Tabdpt: Scaling tabular foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.18164, 2024.
[24] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel,
     P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher,
     M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. 12:2825–2830, 2011.
[25] Bojan Tunguz, Dieter, Heads or Tails, Karnika Kapoor, Parul Pandey, Paul Mooney, Phil
     Culliton, Rob Mulla, Sanyam Bhutani, and Will Cukierski. 2023 kaggle ai report, 2023. URL
     https://kaggle.com/competitions/2023-kaggle-ai-report.
[26] Myung Jun Kim, Leo Grinsztajn, and Gael Varoquaux. Carte: Pretraining and transfer for
     tabular learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 23843–23866.
     PMLR, 2024.
[27] Anders Krogh and Jesper Vedelsby.      Neural network ensembles, cross valida-
     tion, and active learning.   In G. Tesauro, D. Touretzky, and T. Leen, edi-
     tors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 7. MIT Press,
     1994. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/1994/file/
     b8c37e33defde51cf91e1e03e51657da-Paper.pdf.
[28] B. Bischl, G. Casalicchio, M. Feurer, F. Hutter, M. Lang, R. Mantovani, J. N. van Rijn,
     and J. Vanschoren. Openml benchmarking suites and the openml100. arXiv:1708.03731v1
     [stat.ML], 2019.
[29] B. Bischl, G. Casalicchio, M. Feurer, F. Hutter, M. Lang, R. Mantovani, J. van Rijn, and
     J. Vanschoren. OpenML benchmarking suites. In J. Vanschoren and S. Yeung, editors,
     Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems Track on Datasets and Benchmarks,
     2021.
[30] Y. Gorishniy, I. Rubachev, V. Khrulkov, and A. Babenko. Revisiting deep learning models for
     tabular data. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, K. Nguyen, P. Liang, J. Vaughan, and Y. Dauphin,
     editors, Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems (NeurIPS’21), pages 18932–18943, 2021.
[31] Ravid Shwartz-Ziv and Amitai Armon. Tabular data: Deep learning is not all you need.
     Information Fusion, 81:84–90, 2022.
[32] L. Grinsztajn, E. Oyallon, and G. Varoquaux. Why do tree-based models still outperform deep
     learning on typical tabular data? In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho,
     and A. Oh, editors, Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Advances in Neural
     Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS’22), 2022.
[33] D. McElfresh, S. Khandagale, J. Valverde, V. Prasad C, G. Ramakrishnan, M. Goldblum,
     and C. White. When do neural nets outperform boosted trees on tabular data? In A. Oh,
     T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine, editors, Proceedings of
     the 36th International Conference on Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
     (NeurIPS’23), pages 76336–76369, 2023.
[34] S. Fischer, L. Harutyunyan, M. Feurer, and B. Bischl. Openml-ctr23 – a curated tabular
     regression benchmarking suite. In A. Faust, C. White, F. Hutter, R. Garnett, and J. Gardner,
     editors, Second International Conference on Automated Machine Learning - Workshop Track,
     2023.
[35] P. Gijsbers, M. Bueno, S. Coors, E. LeDell, S. Poirier, J. Thomas, B. Bischl, and J. Vanschoren.
     Amlb: an automl benchmark. 25(101):1–65, 2024.
[36] Han-Jia Ye, Si-Yang Liu, Hao-Run Cai, Qi-Le Zhou, and De-Chuan Zhan. A closer look at
     deep learning on tabular data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.00956, 2024.
[37] David Salinas and Nick Erickson. Tabrepo: A large scale repository of tabular model evalua-
     tions and its automl applications. In AutoML Conference 2024 (ABCD Track), 2024.
[38] Arpad E Elo. The proposed uscf rating system, its development, theory, and applications.
     Chess life, 22(8):242–247, 1967.
[39] Wei-Lin Chiang, Lianmin Zheng, Ying Sheng, Anastasios Nikolas Angelopoulos, Tianle Li,
     Dacheng Li, Banghua Zhu, Hao Zhang, Michael Jordan, Joseph E Gonzalez, et al. Chatbot


                                                13
     arena: An open platform for evaluating llms by human preference. In Forty-first International
     Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
[40] J. Maier, F. Möller, and L. Purucker. Hardware aware ensemble selection for balancing
     predictive accuracy and cost. In M. Lindauer, K. Eggensperger, R. Garnett, J. Vanschoren,
     and J. Gardner, editors, Third International Conference on Automated Machine Learning -
     Workshop Track, 2024.
[41] T. Nagler, L. Schneider, B. Bischl, and M. Feurer. Reshuffling resampling splits can improve
     generalization of hyperparameter optimization. In Proceedings of the 37th International
     Conference on Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS’24), 2024.
[42] Lennart Schneider, Bernd Bischl, and Matthias Feurer. Overtuning in hyperparameter opti-
     mization. In International Conference on Automated Machine Learning, 2025.
[43] L. Purucker, L. Schneider, M. Anastacio, J. Beel, B. Bischl, and H. Hoos. Q(d)o-es: Population-
     based quality (diversity) optimisation for post hoc ensemble selection in automl. In A. Faust,
     C. White, F. Hutter, R. Garnett, and J. Gardner, editors, Proceedings of the Second International
     Conference on Automated Machine Learning. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
     2023.
[44] L. Purucker and J. Beel. Cma-es for post hoc ensembling in automl: A great success and
     salvageable failure. In A. Faust, C. White, F. Hutter, R. Garnett, and J. Gardner, editors,
     Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Automated Machine Learning. Pro-
     ceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2023.
[45] Manu Joseph. Pytorch tabular: A framework for deep learning with tabular data. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2104.13638, 2021.
[46] R. Olson, W. La Cava, P. Orzechowski, R. Urbanowicz, and J. Moore. PMLB: a large
     benchmark suite for machine learning evaluation and comparison. BioData mining, 10:1–13,
     2017.
[47] Joseph D Romano, Trang T Le, William La Cava, John T Gregg, Daniel J Goldberg, Praneel
     Chakraborty, Natasha L Ray, Daniel Himmelstein, Weixuan Fu, and Jason H Moore. Pmlb v1.0:
     an open-source dataset collection for benchmarking machine learning methods. Bioinformatics,
     38(3):878–880, 2022.
[48] Ricardo Knauer, Marvin Grimm, and Erik Rodner. Pmlbmini: A tabular classification bench-
     mark suite for data-scarce applications. In AutoML Conference 2024 (ABCD Track), 2024.
[49] Guri Zabërgja, Arlind Kadra, Christian Frey, and Josif Grabocka. Is deep learning finally
     better than decision trees on tabular data? arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03970, 2024.
[50] Si-Yang Liu, Hao-Run Cai, Qi-Le Zhou, and Han-Jia Ye. Talent: A tabular analytics and
     learning toolbox. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.04057, 2024.
[51] Yury Gorishniy, Ivan Rubachev, Nikolay Kartashev, Daniil Shlenskii, Akim Kotelnikov, and
     Artem Babenko. Tabr: Tabular deep learning meets nearest neighbors. In The Twelfth
     International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
[52] Nathan Lambert, Valentina Pyatkin, Jacob Morrison, LJ Miranda, Bill Yuchen Lin, Khyathi
     Chandu, Nouha Dziri, Sachin Kumar, Tom Zick, Yejin Choi, et al. Rewardbench: Evaluating
     reward models for language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.13787, 2024.
[53] Colin White, Samuel Dooley, Manley Roberts, Arka Pal, Ben Feuer, Siddhartha Jain, Ravid
     Shwartz-Ziv, Neel Jain, Khalid Saifullah, Siddartha Naidu, et al. Livebench: A challenging,
     contamination-free llm benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.19314, 2024.
[54] Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Anthony DiPofi, Charles Foster, Laurence
     Golding, Jeffrey Hsu, Kyle McDonell, Niklas Muennighoff, Jason Phang, Laria Reynolds, Eric
     Tang, Anish Thite, Ben Wang, Kevin Wang, and Andy Zou. A framework for few-shot language
     model evaluation, September 2021. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5371628.
[55] Clémentine Fourrier, Nathan Habib, Alina Lozovskaya, Konrad Szafer, and Thomas Wolf.
     Open llm leaderboard v2. https://huggingface.co/spaces/open-llm-leaderboard/
     open_llm_leaderboard, 2024.
[56] Taha Aksu, Gerald Woo, Juncheng Liu, Xu Liu, Chenghao Liu, Silvio Savarese, Caiming
     Xiong, and Doyen Sahoo. Gift-eval: A benchmark for general time series forecasting model
     evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.10393, 2024.


                                                14
[57] X. Bouthillier, P. Delaunay, M. Bronzi, A. Trofimov, B. Nichyporuk, J. Szeto, N. Mohammadi
     Sepahvand, E. Raff, K. Madan, V. Voleti, S. Ebrahimi Kahou, V. Michalski, T. Arbel, C. Pal,
     G. Varoquaux, and P. Vincent. Accounting for variance in machine learning benchmarks. In
     A. Smola, A. Dimakis, and I. Stoica, editors, Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 3,
     volume 3, pages 747–769, 2021.
[58] J. Demšar. Statistical comparisons of classifiers over multiple data sets. 7:1–30, 2006.
[59] S. Herbold. Autorank: A python package for automated ranking of classifiers. Journal of
     Open Source Software, 5(48):2173–2173, 2020.
[60] Han-Jia Ye, Si-Yang Liu, and Wei-Lun Chao. A closer look at tabpfn v2: Strength, limitation,
     and extension. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.17361, 2025.
[61] M. Feurer, J. van Rijn, A. Kadra, P. Gijsbers, N. Mallik, S. Ravi, A. Müller, J. Vanschoren, and
     F. Hutter. OpenML-Python: an extensible Python API for OpenML. 22(100):1–5, 2021.
[62] Bernd Bischl, Giuseppe Casalicchio, Taniya Das, Matthias Feurer, Sebastian Fischer, Pieter
     Gijsbers, Subhaditya Mukherjee, Andreas C Müller, László Németh, Luis Oala, et al. Openml:
     Insights from 10 years and more than a thousand papers. Patterns, 2025.
[63] Xiang Deng, Huan Sun, Alyssa Lees, You Wu, and Cong Yu. Turl: Table understanding
     through representation learning. ACM SIGMOD Record, 51(1):33–40, 2022.
[64] Madelon Hulsebos, Çagatay Demiralp, and Paul Groth. Gittables: A large-scale corpus of
     relational tables. Proceedings of the ACM on Management of Data, 1(1):1–17, 2023.
[65] I-Cheng Yeh, King-Jang Yang, and Tao-Ming Ting. Knowledge discovery on rfm model using
     bernoulli sequence. Expert Systems with applications, 36(3):5866–5871, 2009.
[66] Jack W Smith, James E Everhart, William C Dickson, William C Knowler, and Robert Scott
     Johannes. Using the adap learning algorithm to forecast the onset of diabetes mellitus. In
     Proceedings of the annual symposium on computer application in medical care, page 261,
     1988.
[67] Unknown. Annealing. https://doi.org/10.24432/C5RW2F, 1990. UCI Machine Learning
     Repository.
[68] Matteo Cassotti, Davide Ballabio, Roberto Todeschini, and Viviana Consonni. A similarity-
     based qsar model for predicting acute toxicity towards the fathead minnow (pimephales
     promelas). SAR and QSAR in Environmental Research, 26(3):217–243, 2015.
[69] H. Hofmann. Statlog (german credit data) [dataset]. https://doi.org/10.24432/C5NC77,
     1994. UCI Machine Learning Repository.
[70] Marzia Ahmed, Mohammod Abul Kashem, Mostafijur Rahman, and Sabira Khatun. Review
     and analysis of risk factor of maternal health in remote area using the internet of things (iot).
     In InECCE2019: Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Electrical, Control &
     Computer Engineering, Kuantan, Pahang, Malaysia, 29th July 2019, pages 357–365. Springer,
     2020.
[71] I-C Yeh. Modeling of strength of high-performance concrete using artificial neural networks.
     Cement and Concrete research, 28(12):1797–1808, 1998.
[72] Kamel Mansouri, Tine Ringsted, Davide Ballabio, Roberto Todeschini, and Viviana Consonni.
     Quantitative structure–activity relationship models for ready biodegradability of chemicals.
     Journal of chemical information and modeling, 53(4):867–878, 2013.
[73] Kaggle User Arunjangir245. Healthcare insurance expenses. https://www.kaggle.com/
     datasets/arunjangir245/healthcare-insurance-expenses/, 2023. Kaggle dataset.
[74] Neda Abdelhamid, Aladdin Ayesh, and Fadi Thabtah. Phishing detection based associative
     classification data mining. Expert Systems with Applications, 41(13):5948–5959, 2014.
[75] Kaggle User Ddosad. Fitness club dataset for ml classification. https://www.kaggle.com/
     datasets/ddosad/datacamps-data-science-associate-certification,                    2023.
     Kaggle dataset.
[76] Thomas F Brooks, D Stuart Pope, and Michael A Marcolini. Airfoil self-noise and prediction.
     Technical report, 1989.


                                                15
[77] Kaggle User Paolocons. Another dataset on used fiat 500 (1538 rows). https://www.kaggle.
     com/datasets/paolocons/another-fiat-500-dataset-1538-rows, 2020. Kaggle
     dataset.
[78] Sergey E Golovenkin, Jonathan Bac, Alexander Chervov, Evgeny M Mirkes, Yuliya V Orlova,
     Emmanuel Barillot, Alexander N Gorban, and Andrei Zinovyev. Trajectories, bifurcations,
     and pseudo-time in large clinical datasets: applications to myocardial infarction and diabetes
     data. GigaScience, 9(11):giaa128, 2020.
[79] Kaggle User Podsyp. Is this a good customer? https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/
     podsyp/is-this-a-good-customer, 2020. Kaggle dataset.
[80] Rodolfo Saldanha.      Marketing campaign.          https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/
     rodsaldanha/arketing-campaign, 2020. Kaggle dataset.
[81] Marco Ricci, Bernardita Štitić, Luca Urbinati, Giuseppe Di Guglielmo, Jorge A Tobón Vasquez,
     Luca P Carloni, Francesca Vipiana, and Mario R Casu. Machine-learning-based microwave
     sensing: A case study for the food industry. IEEE Journal on Emerging and Selected Topics in
     Circuits and Systems, 11(3):503–514, 2021.
[82] Marek Sikora and Łukasz Wróbel. Application of rule induction algorithms for analysis of data
     collected by seismic hazard monitoring systems in coal mines. Archives of Mining Sciences,
     55(1):91–114, 2010.
[83] Geoffrey G Towell and Jude W Shavlik. Knowledge-based artificial neural networks. Artificial
     intelligence, 70(1-2):119–165, 1994.
[84] Ben Hamner, dcthompson, and Jorg. Predicting a biological response. https://www.kaggle.
     com/competitions/bioresponse, 2012. Kaggle competition.
[85] Isabelle Guyon, Amir Saffari, Gideon Dror, and Gavin Cawley. Agnostic learning vs. prior
     knowledge challenge. In 2007 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, pages
     829–834. IEEE, 2007.
[86] Mónica V Martins, Daniel Tolledo, Jorge Machado, Luís MT Baptista, and Valentim Realinho.
     Early prediction of student’s performance in higher education: A case study. In Trends and
     Applications in Information Systems and Technologies: Volume 1 9, pages 166–175. Springer,
     2021.
[87] George A Marcoulides. Discovering knowledge in data: An introduction to data mining, 2005.
[88] Ivan Olier, Noureddin Sadawi, G Richard Bickerton, Joaquin Vanschoren, Crina Grosan, Larisa
     Soldatova, and Ross D King. Meta-qsar: a large-scale application of meta-learning to drug
     design and discovery. Machine Learning, 107:285–311, 2018.
[89] Maciej Zi˛eba, Sebastian K Tomczak, and Jakub M Tomczak. Ensemble boosted trees with
     synthetic features generation in application to bankruptcy prediction. Expert systems with
     applications, 58:93–101, 2016.
[90] Paulo Cortez, António Cerdeira, Fernando Almeida, Telmo Matos, and José Reis. Modeling
     wine preferences by data mining from physicochemical properties. Decision support systems,
     47(4):547–553, 2009.
[91] Deron Liang, Chia-Chi Lu, Chih-Fong Tsai, and Guan-An Shih. Financial ratios and corporate
     governance indicators in bankruptcy prediction: A comprehensive study. European journal of
     operational research, 252(2):561–572, 2016.
[92] Akshay Mathur, Laxmi Mounika Podila, Keyur Kulkarni, Quamar Niyaz, and Ahmad Y
     Javaid. Naticusdroid: A malware detection framework for android using native and custom
     permissions. Journal of Information Security and Applications, 58:102696, 2021.
[93] Peter Van Der Putten, Maarten van Someren, et al. Coil challenge 2000: The insurance
     company case. Technical report, Technical Report 2000–09, Leiden Institute of Advanced
     Computer Science . . . , 2000.
[94] Gaurav Topre. Bank customer churn dataset. https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/
     gauravtopre/bank-customer-churn-dataset, 2022. Kaggle dataset.
[95] Kaggle User Averkiyoliabev. Home equity line of credit (heloc). https://www.kaggle.
     com/datasets/averkiyoliabev/home-equity-line-of-creditheloc, 2021. Kaggle
     dataset.


                                               16
 [96] Tim Menzies and Justin S Di Stefano. How good is your blind spot sampling policy. In Eighth
      IEEE International Symposium on High Assurance Systems Engineering, 2004. Proceedings.,
      pages 129–138. IEEE, 2004.
 [97] Prachi Gopalani. E-commerce shipping data. https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/
      prachi13/customer-analytics, 2021. Kaggle dataset.
 [98] C Okan Sakar, S Olcay Polat, Mete Katircioglu, and Yomi Kastro. Real-time prediction of
      online shoppers’ purchasing intention using multilayer perceptron and lstm recurrent neural
      networks. Neural Computing and Applications, 31(10):6893–6908, 2019.
 [99] Tong Wang, Cynthia Rudin, Finale Doshi-Velez, Yimin Liu, Erica Klampfl, and Perry Mac-
      Neille. A bayesian framework for learning rule sets for interpretable classification. Journal of
      Machine Learning Research, 18(70):1–37, 2017.
[100] Steven C Bourassa, Martin Hoesli, Louis Merlin, and John Renne. Big data, accessibility and
      urban house prices. Urban Studies, 58(15):3176–3195, 2021.
[101] Kaggle User Arashnic. Hr analytics: Job change of data scientists. https://www.kaggle.
      com/datasets/arashnic/hr-analytics-job-change-of-data-scientists, 2021.
      Kaggle dataset.
[102] R Kelley Pace and Ronald Barry. Sparse spatial autoregressions. Statistics & Probability
      Letters, 33(3):291–297, 1997.
[103] Kam Hamidieh. A data-driven statistical model for predicting the critical temperature of a
      superconductor. Computational Materials Science, 154:346–354, 2018.
[104] I-Cheng Yeh and Che-hui Lien. The comparisons of data mining techniques for the predictive
      accuracy of probability of default of credit card clients. Expert systems with applications, 36
      (2):2473–2480, 2009.
[105] Ben Hamner, kenmonta, and Will Cukierski. Amazon.com - employee access challenge.
      https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/amazon-employee-access-challenge,
      2013. Kaggle competition.
[106] Sergio Moro, Raul Laureano, and Paulo Cortez. Using data mining for bank direct marketing:
      An application of the crisp-dm methodology. 2011.
[107] Sérgio Moro, Paulo Cortez, and Paulo Rita. A data-driven approach to predict the success of
      bank telemarketing. Decision Support Systems, 62:22–31, 2014.
[108] Kaggle User Rajatkumar30. Food delivery time. https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/
      rajatkumar30/food-delivery-time, 2023. Kaggle dataset.
[109] Prashant Rana. Physicochemical properties of protein tertiary structure. https://doi.org/
      10.24432/C5QW3H, 2013. UCI Machine Learning Repository.
[110] Isabelle Guyon, Vincent Lemaire, Marc Boullé, Gideon Dror, and David Vogel. Analysis
      of the kdd cup 2009: Fast scoring on a large orange customer database. In KDD-Cup 2009
      Competition, pages 1–22. PMLR, 2009.
[111] Hadley Wickham. Data analysis. In ggplot2: Elegant graphics for data analysis, pages
      189–201. Springer, 2016.
[112] Beata Strack, Jonathan P DeShazo, Chris Gennings, Juan L Olmo, Sebastian Ventura,
      Krzysztof J Cios, and John N Clore. Impact of hba1c measurement on hospital readmis-
      sion rates: analysis of 70,000 clinical database patient records. BioMed research international,
      2014(1):781670, 2014.
[113] IDA2016Challenge. Ida2016challenge [dataset]. https://doi.org/10.24432/C5V60Q,
      2016. UCI Machine Learning Repository.
[114] Katherine Accetta, Conny Aerts, Victor Silva Aguirre, Romina Ahumada, Nikhil Ajgaonkar,
      N Filiz Ak, Shadab Alam, Carlos Allende Prieto, Andres Almeida, Friedrich Anders, et al.
      The seventeenth data release of the sloan digital sky surveys: Complete release of manga,
      mastar, and apogee-2 data. The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 259(2):35, 2022.
[115] Kaggle User Yakhyojon. Customer satisfaction in airline. https://www.kaggle.com/
      datasets/yakhyojon/customer-satisfaction-in-airline, 2023. Kaggle dataset.
[116] Credit Fusion and Will Cukierski. Give me some credit. https://www.kaggle.com/
      competitions/GiveMeSomeCredit, 2011. Kaggle competition.


                                                 17
[117] Carlos Huertas. Gradient boosting trees and large language models for tabular data few-shot
      learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.04324, 2024.
[118] Y. Shen, Y. Lu, Y. Li, Y. Tu, W. Zhang, and B. Cui. Divbo: Diversity-aware cash for ensemble
      learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:2958–2971, 2022.
[119] R. Caruana, A. Munson, and A. Niculescu-Mizil. Getting the most out of ensemble selection.
      In C. Clifton, N. Zhong, J. Liu, B. Wah, and X. Wu, editors, Proceedings of the 6th IEEE
      International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM’06), pages 828–833, 2006.
[120] M. Feurer, A. Klein, K. Eggensperger, J. Springenberg, M. Blum, and F. Hutter. Auto-sklearn:
      Efficient and robust automated machine learning. In F. Hutter, L. Kotthoff, and J. Vanschoren,
      editors, Automated Machine Learning: Methods, Systems, Challenges, chapter 6, pages
      113–134. Springer, 2019. Available for free at http://automl.org/book.
[121] L. Purucker and J. Beel. Assembled-openml: Creating efficient benchmarks for ensembles in
      automl with openml. In I. Guyon, M. Lindauer, M. van der Schaar, F. Hutter, and R. Garnett,
      editors, First International Conference on Automated Machine Learning - Workshop Track,
      2022.
[122] Sebastian Bordt, Harsha Nori, Vanessa Cristiny Rodrigues Vasconcelos, Besmira Nushi, and
      Rich Caruana. Elephants never forget: Memorization and learning of tabular data in large
      language models. In First Conference on Language Modeling, 2024.
[123] Marco Spinaci, Marek Polewczyk, Maximilian Schambach, and Sam Thelin. Contexttab: A
      semantics-aware tabular in-context learner. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.10707, 2025.
[124] Anurag Garg, Muhammad Ali, Noah Hollmann, Lennart Purucker, Samuel Müller, and Frank
      Hutter. Real-tabpfn: Improving tabular foundation models via continued pre-training with
      real-world data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.03971, 2025.
[125] Alan Arazi, Eilam Shapira, and Roi Reichart. Tabstar: A foundation tabular model with
      semantically target-aware representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.18125, 2025.




                                                18
NeurIPS Paper Checklist
    1. Claims
      Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the
      paper’s contributions and scope?
      Answer: [Yes]
      Justification: The abstract and introduction both contain our claims about contributions and
      scope. In detail, we claim that we (1) introduce TabArena, (2) manually curate datasets, (3)
      conduct a large-scale benchmark study, (4) initialize a public leaderboard, (5) assemble a
      team of maintainers. Moreover, we claim in the abstract and introduction that our results
      show: (6) the importance of validation and ensembling methods, (7) deep learning has
      caught up to gradient-boosted trees, (8) foundation models excel on smaller datasets, (9)
      ensemble across models advance state-of-the-art, and (10) that we investigate individual
      model contributions. Finally, we claim that (11) to share code and maintenance protocols
      for the living benchmark. We deliver on our claims as follows: (1,2) in Section 2, (3,4) in
      Section 3.1, (5) as part of our (visible) author list, (6-10) in Section 3.2, and (11) in Section 2
      and Appendix E.
      Guidelines:
         • The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims
           made in the paper.
         • The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the
           contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or
           NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers.
         • The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how
           much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings.
         • It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals
           are not attained by the paper.
    2. Limitations
      Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors?
      Answer: [Yes]
      Justification: Limitations are discussed in Section 5.
      Guidelines:
         • The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that
           the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper.
         • The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper.
         • The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to
           violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings,
           model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors
           should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the
           implications would be.
         • The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was
           only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often
           depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated.
         • The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach.
           For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution
           is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be
           used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle
           technical jargon.
         • The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms
           and how they scale with dataset size.
         • If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to
           address problems of privacy and fairness.


                                                 19
     • While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by
       reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover
       limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best
       judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an impor-
       tant role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers
       will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations.
3. Theory assumptions and proofs
  Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and
  a complete (and correct) proof?
  Answer: [NA]
  Justification: The paper does not include theoretical results.
  Guidelines:
     • The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results.
     • All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-
       referenced.
     • All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems.
     • The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if
       they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short
       proof sketch to provide intuition.
     • Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented
       by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material.
     • Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced.
4. Experimental result reproducibility
  Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main ex-
  perimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions
  of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)?
  Answer: [Yes]
  Justification: We describe our benchmark and experimental setup in Section 2, Section 3,
  provide more details in the appendix, and share all our result artifacts. Moreover, all our
  code is public.
  Guidelines:
     • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
     • If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived
       well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of
       whether the code and data are provided or not.
     • If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken
       to make their results reproducible or verifiable.
     • Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways.
       For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully
       might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may
       be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same
       dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often
       one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed
       instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case
       of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are
       appropriate to the research performed.
     • While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submis-
       sions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the
       nature of the contribution. For example
       (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how
            to reproduce that algorithm.
       (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe
            the architecture clearly and fully.


                                           20
       (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should
           either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce
           the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct
           the dataset).
       (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case
           authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility.
           In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in
           some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers
           to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results.
5. Open access to data and code
   Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-
   tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental
   material?
  Answer: [Yes]
  Justification: We release all our data and code as part of the public TabArena framework.
  See Appendix E for user guides and links.
   Guidelines:
     • The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code.
     • Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines (https://nips.cc/
       public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy) for more details.
     • While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be
       possible, so “No” is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not
       including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source
       benchmark).
     • The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to
       reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines (https:
       //nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy) for more details.
     • The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how
       to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc.
     • The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new
       proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they
       should state which ones are omitted from the script and why.
     • At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized
       versions (if applicable).
     • Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the
       paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted.
6. Experimental setting/details
   Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyper-
   parameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the
   results?
  Answer: [Yes]
  Justification: We describe our benchmark design and experimental setup in Section 2,
  Section 3, and provide details in the appendix.
   Guidelines:
     • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
     • The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail
       that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them.
     • The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental
       material.
7. Experiment statistical significance
   Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate
   information about the statistical significance of the experiments?


                                            21
   Answer: [Yes]
   Justification: We include error bars in all our result plots and investigate statistical signifi-
   cance in Appendix A.5.
   Guidelines:
      • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
      • The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confi-
         dence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support
         the main claims of the paper.
      • The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for
         example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall
         run with given experimental conditions).
      • The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula,
         call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.)
      • The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors).
      • It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error
         of the mean.
      • It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should
         preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis
         of Normality of errors is not verified.
      • For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or
         figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative
         error rates).
      • If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how
         they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text.
8. Experiments compute resources
   Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the com-
   puter resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce
   the experiments?
   Answer: [Yes]
   Justification: We detail information on the computer resources in Section 3.
   Guidelines:
      • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
      • The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster,
         or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage.
      • The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual
         experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute.
      • The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute
         than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that
         didn’t make it into the paper).
9. Code of ethics
   Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the
   NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines?
   Answer: [Yes]
   Justification: We believe our work conforms to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. We were
   especially careful regarding the points "Copyright and Fair Use" and ethical concerns during
   our data curation, see Appendix B.1.
   Guidelines:
      • The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics.
      • If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a
         deviation from the Code of Ethics.
      • The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consid-
         eration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction).


                                              22
10. Broader impacts
    Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative
    societal impacts of the work performed?
    Answer: [Yes]
    Justification: We discuss positive societal impacts and negative societal impacts of the work
    in Section 5.
    Guidelines:
       • The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed.
       • If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal
         impact or why the paper does not address societal impact.
       • Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses
         (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations
         (e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific
         groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations.
       • The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied
         to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to
         any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate
         to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to
         generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out
         that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train
         models that generate Deepfakes faster.
       • The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is
         being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the
         technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following
         from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology.
       • If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation
         strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks,
         mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from
         feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML).
11. Safeguards
    Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible
    release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models,
    image generators, or scraped datasets)?
    Answer: [NA]
    Justification: We do not release new models. Moreover, we only curate existing datasets,
    and the code and result data artifacts we release have no perceivable risk of misuse.
    Guidelines:
       • The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks.
       • Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with
         necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring
         that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing
         safety filters.
       • Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors
         should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images.
       • We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do
         not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best
         faith effort.
12. Licenses for existing assets
    Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in
    the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and
    properly respected?
    Answer: [Yes]


                                             23
   Justification: We carefully curate the assets we use and only include assets with licenses that
   allow our work. Moreover, we credit creators and licenses in Appendix B.2.
   Guidelines:
      • The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets.
      • The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset.
      • The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a
        URL.
      • The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset.
      • For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of
        service of that source should be provided.
      • If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the
        package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets
        has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the
        license of a dataset.
      • For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of
        the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided.
      • If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to
        the asset’s creators.
13. New assets
   Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation
   provided alongside the assets?
   Answer: [Yes]
   Justification: We detail our new dataset assets in Appendix B.2 and provide user guides for
   our code assets in Appendix E.
   Guidelines:
      • The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets.
      • Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their
        submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license,
        limitations, etc.
      • The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose
        asset is used.
      • At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either
        create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file.
14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects
   Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper
   include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as
   well as details about compensation (if any)?
   Answer: [NA]
   Justification: The paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects.
   Guidelines:
      • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with
        human subjects.
      • Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribu-
        tion of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be
        included in the main paper.
      • According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation,
        or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data
        collector.
15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human
    subjects


                                            24
    Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether
    such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB)
    approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or
    institution) were obtained?
    Answer: [NA]
    Justification: The paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects.
    Guidelines:
       • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with
          human subjects.
       • Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent)
          may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you
          should clearly state this in the paper.
       • We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions
          and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the
          guidelines for their institution.
       • For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if
          applicable), such as the institution conducting the review.
16. Declaration of LLM usage
    Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or
    non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used
    only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology,
    scientific rigorousness, or originality of the research, declaration is not required.
    Answer: [NA]
    Justification: LLMs are not a component of the core method in our work.
    Guidelines:
       • The answer NA means that the core method development in this research does not
          involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components.
       • Please refer to our LLM policy (https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2025/LLM)
          for what should or should not be described.




                                           25
Appendices
Table of Contents.

A Additional Experiments                                                                          27
   A.1 Alternative Leaderboard Versions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     27
   A.2 Analyzing Training Time Limit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      27
   A.3 Tabular Deep Learning on GPU vs. CPU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         31
   A.4 TabArena-Lite . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    33
   A.5 Investigating Statistical Significance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   33
   A.6 Investigating Tuning Trajectories and Validation Overfitting . . . . . . . . . . . . .     35

B Data Curation                                                                                   36
   B.1 Dataset Selection Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   37
   B.2 Included Datasets Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    38
   B.3 Noteworthy Observations from Curation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        38

C Model Curation                                                                                  41
   C.1 Implementation Framework Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         41
   C.2 Hyperparameter search spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       42
   C.3 Cross-validation Ensembles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     47
   C.4 Post-hoc Ensembling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      47
   C.5 TabArena Ensemble . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      47

D Evaluation Design Details                                                                       48
   D.1 Elo Confidence Intervals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     48
   D.2 Sources of Randomness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      48
   D.3 Environmental Impact of TabArena . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       49

E Using and Contributing to the Living Benchmark                                                  49
   E.1 Benchmarking with TabArena . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         49
   E.2 Contributing Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      51
   E.3 Contributing Data: New Datasets and Curation Feedback . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          51
   E.4 Contributing Results: Leaderboard Submissions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        54
   E.5 Running TabArena Models in Practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        55
   E.6 Handling Foul Play and Dataset Contamination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         55

F Performance Results Per Dataset                                                                 57




                                                26
A     Additional Experiments
A.1   Alternative Leaderboard Versions

Aggregation Methods. Here, we provide more leaderboard variants, using different aggregation
strategies. Specifically, we obtain errors erri for each dataset i by averaging error metrics (1-AUROC
for binary, logloss for multiclass, and RMSE for regression) over all outer folds. We then aggregate
these errors as follows:

       • Elo: As described in Section 2.3.
       • Normalized score: Following Salinas and Erickson [37], we linearly rescale the error such
         that the best method has a normalized score of one, and the median method has a normalized
         score of 0. Scores below zero are clipped to zero. These scores are then averaged across
         datasets.
       • Average rank: Ranks of methods are computed on each dataset (lower is better) and
         averaged.
       • Harmonic mean rank: Taking the harmonic mean of ranks,
                                                       1
                                              1
                                                  PN                 ,
                                              N     i=1 (1/ranki )

         more strongly favors methods having very low ranks on some datasets. It therefore favors
         methods that are sometimes very good and sometimes very bad over methods that are always
         mediocre, as the former are more likely to be useful in conjunction with other methods.
       • Improvability: We introduce improvability as a metric that measures how many percent
         lower the error of the best method is than the current method on a dataset. This is then
         averaged over datasets. Formally, for a single dataset,
                                                     erri − best_erri
                                 Improvability :=                     · 100% .
                                                           erri
         Improvability is always between 0% and 100%.

Results. Figure A.1 presents a leaderboard including all models. We impute the results for models
on datasets where they are not applicable with the results of RandomForest (default). We choose
the default random forest since it is a fast baseline that is sufficiently but not unreasonably weak, to
penalize models that are not applicable to all datasets. Table A.1 presents the same data in tabularized
format, akin to the current version of the live leaderboard at tabarena.ai. Table A.1 further includes
several additional metrics to asses peak average performance, some of which change the ranking (see
the color coding) as they are less influenced by model-wise negative outlier results introduced by
imputation.
We further investigate our results by presenting the leaderboard across task types. We show the results
per task type by computing the results only with datasets from: binary classification in Figure A.2,
multiclass classification in Figure A.3, and regression in Figure A.4.
In addition, we show pairwise win rate comparisons of the models in Figure A.5. Among the models
with the best performance in our main analysis, the win rates over strong competitors are rather
moderate. This undermines that there is no one-size-fits-all solution.
Next, Figure A.6 and Figure A.7 present the results for the TabPFNv2-compatible and TabICL-
compatible datasets, but also impute TabPFNv2/TabICL to enable a more direct comparison between
these two foundation models. Finally, Figure A.8 presents the result only with datasets for which
both TabPFNv2 and TabICL are compatible.

A.2   Analyzing Training Time Limit

In our experiments, we restrict the time to evaluate one configuration on one train split of a dataset
to 1 hour. Thus, a model must finish training (across all 8 inner folds) within 1 hour, or its training
will be gracefully stopped early. Figure A.9 presents the training runtime for all hyperparameter
configurations for all models by visualizing what proportion of configurations (x-axis) took how
many seconds for training (y-axis).


                                                  27
                  Partially imputed        Tuned                                            Partially imputed               Tuned
                  Default                  Tuned + Ensembled                                Default                         Tuned + Ensembled

      RealMLP                                                                   RealMLP
          TabM                                                                      TabM
     LightGBM                                                                  TabPFNv2
      CatBoost                                                                 LightGBM
      XGBoost                                                                ModernNCA
   ModernNCA                                                                    CatBoost
     TabPFNv2                                                                     TabICL
        TabICL                                                                  XGBoost
     TorchMLP                                                                    TabDPT
       TabDPT                                                                  TorchMLP
           EBM                                                                       EBM
     FastaiMLP                                                                 FastaiMLP
     ExtraTrees                                                                ExtraTrees
  RandomForest                                                              RandomForest
           KNN                                                                     Linear
         Linear                           AutoGluon 1.3 (4h)                         KNN                                       AutoGluon 1.3 (4h)
                  800         1000       1200      1400         1600                        0.0      0.1        0.2      0.3         0.4   0.5    0.6
                                          Elo                                                                   Normalized score


Figure A.1: TabArena-v0.1 leaderboard with imputation for TabPFNv2 and TabICL, Elo (left)
and normalized scores (right). For TabPFNv2 and TabICL, on datasets where they are not applicable,
we impute their results with RandomForest (default).


                  Partially imputed        Tuned                                            Partially imputed               Tuned
                  Default                  Tuned + Ensembled                                Default                         Tuned + Ensembled

          TabM                                                                    TabICL
        TabICL                                                                      TabM
      RealMLP                                                                   RealMLP
     LightGBM                                                                  TabPFNv2
      CatBoost                                                                 LightGBM
      XGBoost                                                                ModernNCA
     TabPFNv2                                                                   CatBoost
   ModernNCA                                                                    XGBoost
           EBM                                                                 TorchMLP
     TorchMLP                                                                        EBM
     FastaiMLP                                                                 FastaiMLP
       TabDPT                                                                    TabDPT
     ExtraTrees                                                                ExtraTrees
  RandomForest                                                                     Linear
         Linear                                                             RandomForest
           KNN                           AutoGluon 1.3 (4h)                          KNN                              AutoGluon 1.3 (4h)
                  800        1000       1200      1400         1600                         0.0              0.2               0.4          0.6
                                          Elo                                                                   Normalized score


Figure A.2: Benchmark results on binary classification with Elo (left) and normalized scores
(right). For TabPFNv2 and TabICL, on datasets where they are not applicable, we impute their results
with RandomForest (default).


                  Partially imputed        Tuned                                            Partially imputed               Tuned
                  Default                  Tuned + Ensembled                                Default                         Tuned + Ensembled

     TabPFNv2                                                                  TabPFNv2
          TabM                                                                  RealMLP
      RealMLP                                                                       TabM
      CatBoost                                                                  CatBoost
     LightGBM                                                                  LightGBM
      XGBoost                                                                     TabICL
   ModernNCA                                                                RandomForest
        TabICL                                                                  XGBoost
  RandomForest                                                               ModernNCA
     ExtraTrees                                                                ExtraTrees
     TorchMLP                                                                  FastaiMLP
     FastaiMLP                                                                   TabDPT
           EBM                                                                       EBM
       TabDPT                                                                  TorchMLP
         Linear                                                                      KNN
           KNN                        AutoGluon 1.3 (4h)                           Linear         AutoGluon 1.3 (4h)
                  800        1000       1200     1400          1600                         0.0        0.2            0.4            0.6    0.8
                                          Elo                                                                   Normalized score


Figure A.3: Benchmark results on multiclass classification with Elo (left) and normalized scores
(right). For TabPFNv2 and TabICL, on datasets where they are not applicable, we impute their results
with RandomForest (default).


                                                                       28
                                  Partially imputed                    Tuned                                                              Partially imputed                       Tuned
                                  Default                              Tuned + Ensembled                                                  Default                                 Tuned + Ensembled

                      RealMLP                                                                                             RealMLP
                   ModernNCA                                                                                               TabDPT
                       TabDPT                                                                                          ModernNCA
                      CatBoost                                                                                            CatBoost
                     LightGBM                                                                                            LightGBM
                          TabM                                                                                                TabM
                      XGBoost                                                                                             XGBoost
                     TabPFNv2                                                                                            TabPFNv2
                     TorchMLP                                                                                            TorchMLP
                     ExtraTrees                                                                                                EBM
                  RandomForest                                                                                           ExtraTrees
                           EBM                                                                                        RandomForest
                     FastaiMLP                                                                                           FastaiMLP
                           KNN                                                                                                 KNN
                         Linear                                     AutoGluon 1.3 (4h)                                       Linear                                      AutoGluon 1.3 (4h)
                                  800          1000         1200         1400          1600           1800                                0.0               0.2             0.4            0.6        0.8
                                                                    Elo                                                                                           Normalized score


Figure A.4: Benchmark results on regression with Elo (left) and normalized scores (right). For
TabPFNv2 and TabICL, on datasets where they are not applicable, we impute their results with
RandomForest (default).




                                                                                                       Model B: Loser
                                                                                                                                          Ra
                                                                  Mo                               Ta                     Fa         Ex      nd
                                               Lig                                       To                                                     om
                            Re
                              alM         Ta       htG CatB         de
                                                                        rn      XG
                                                                                   Bo        rch      bD
                                                                                                         PT                  sta
                                                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                                                        tra
                                                                                                                                           Tre      Fo                   Lin
                                             b         B       o o         N CA        o         M            (de     E B          M                   res        KN         ea
                                    LP         M        M          st                    st        LP                     M          LP        es          t (T      N         r (T
                                       (T+       (T+      (T+         (T+       (T+         (T+        (T+        fau       (T+         (T+       (T+           +      (T+          +E
                                           E)        E)       E)          E)        E)          E)         E)        lt)        E)          E)        E)          E)       E)          )

                       RealMLP (T+E)                   57         61        65         57        71          80        71        78         84         86         90        96        96         Win Rate (%)


                          TabM (T+E)        43                    59        65         61        67          82        73        76         88         80         78        92        92              90


                      LightGBM (T+E)        39         41                   59         53        76          75        63        80         80         82         88        96        96
                                                                                                                                                                                                      80
                       CatBoost (T+E)       35         35         41                   55        69          80        65        71         76         82         90        96        94


                    ModernNCA (T+E)         43         39         47        45                   55          65        61        69         75         76         78        86        84              70


                       XGBoost (T+E)        29         33         24        31         45                    75        63        73         73         75         88        94        94
                                                                                                                                                                                                      60




Model A: Winner
                      TorchMLP (T+E)        20         18         25        20         35        25                    51        63         73         69         71        88        84

                                                                                                                                                                                                      50
                     TabDPT (default)       29         27         37        35         39        37          49                  41         51         61         63        82        76


                           EBM (T+E)        22         24         20        29         31        27          37        59                   57         57         59        80        94
                                                                                                                                                                                                      40

                      FastaiMLP (T+E)       16         12         20        24         25        27          27        49        43                    51         59        80        88

                                                                                                                                                                                                      30
                     ExtraTrees (T+E)       14         20         18        18         24        25          31        39        43         49                    65        90        76


                  RandomForest (T+E)        10         22         12        10         22        12          29        37        41         41         35                   88        76              20


                           KNN (T+E)           4        8          4         4         14         6          12        18        20         20         10         12                  59
                                                                                                                                                                                                      10
                         Linear (T+E)          4        8          4         6         16         6          16        24         6         12         24         24        41


Figure A.5: Pairwise win rate comparison for all datasets. Higher numbers correspond to a better
win rate for the model on the y-axis.




                                                                                                              29
                  Partially imputed              Tuned                                              Partially imputed             Tuned
                  Default                        Tuned + Ensembled                                  Default                       Tuned + Ensembled

     TabPFNv2                                                                          TabPFNv2
      RealMLP                                                                           RealMLP
          TabM                                                                              TabM
     LightGBM                                                                             TabICL
      CatBoost                                                                           TabDPT
        TabICL                                                                         LightGBM
      XGBoost                                                                           CatBoost
   ModernNCA                                                                         ModernNCA
       TabDPT                                                                           XGBoost
           EBM                                                                         TorchMLP
     TorchMLP                                                                                EBM
     FastaiMLP                                                                         FastaiMLP
     ExtraTrees                                                                        ExtraTrees
  RandomForest                                                                      RandomForest
         Linear                                                                            Linear
           KNN                        AutoGluon 1.3 (4h)                                     KNN            AutoGluon 1.3 (4h)
                  800       1000        1200         1400       1600                                0.0           0.2        0.4          0.6         0.8
                                               Elo                                                                      Normalized score


Figure A.6: Benchmark results on TabPFNv2-compatible datasets with imputed results for
TabICL, using Elo (left) and normalized scores (right). On datasets where TabICL is not applicable,
we impute its results with RandomForest (default).


                  Partially imputed              Tuned                                              Partially imputed             Tuned
                  Default                        Tuned + Ensembled                                  Default                       Tuned + Ensembled

          TabM                                                                            TabICL
      RealMLP                                                                          TabPFNv2
        TabICL                                                                              TabM
     LightGBM                                                                           RealMLP
      CatBoost                                                                         LightGBM
     TabPFNv2                                                                        ModernNCA
      XGBoost                                                                           CatBoost
   ModernNCA                                                                            XGBoost
     TorchMLP                                                                          TorchMLP
           EBM                                                                         FastaiMLP
     FastaiMLP                                                                           TabDPT
       TabDPT                                                                                EBM
     ExtraTrees                                                                        ExtraTrees
  RandomForest                                                                      RandomForest
         Linear                                                                            Linear
           KNN                                 AutoGluon 1.3 (4h)                            KNN                           AutoGluon 1.3 (4h)
                  800        1000          1200          1400          1600                         0.0     0.1     0.2     0.3     0.4    0.5    0.6
                                               Elo                                                                      Normalized score


Figure A.7: Benchmark results on TabICL-compatible datasets with imputed results for
TabPFNv2, using Elo (left) and normalized scores (right). On datasets where TabPFNv2 is
not applicable, we impute its results with RandomForest (default).


           Default              Tuned                Tuned + Ensembled                       Default               Tuned             Tuned + Ensembled


     TabPFNv2                                                                          TabPFNv2
          TabM                                                                            TabICL
        TabICL                                                                              TabM
      RealMLP                                                                           RealMLP
     LightGBM                                                                          LightGBM
      CatBoost                                                                       ModernNCA
   ModernNCA                                                                            CatBoost
      XGBoost                                                                            TabDPT
           EBM                                                                         FastaiMLP
     TorchMLP                                                                           XGBoost
     FastaiMLP                                                                         TorchMLP
       TabDPT                                                                                EBM
     ExtraTrees                                                                        ExtraTrees
  RandomForest                                                                             Linear
         Linear                                                                     RandomForest
           KNN                    AutoGluon 1.3 (4h)                                         KNN          AutoGluon 1.3 (4h)
                  800      1000         1200      1400      1600        1800                        0.0           0.2        0.4          0.6           0.8
                                               Elo                                                                      Normalized score


Figure A.8: Benchmark results on TabPFNv2- and TabICL-compatible datasets using Elo (left)
and normalized scores (right).


                                                                               30
Table A.1: TabArena-v0.1 Leaderboard. We show default (D), tuned (T), and tuned + ensembled
(T+E) performances. Results of TabPFNv2 and TabICL are imputed with RandomForest (default)
for datasets on which they were not run. Times are median times per 1K samples across datasets,
averaged over all outer folds per dataset. The best three values in columns are highlighted with gold,
silver, and bronze colors. For Elo values, we also indicate their approximate 95% confidence intervals
obtained through bootstrapping.
 Model                Elo (↑)        Norm.      Avg.   Harm. #wins (↑) Improva- Train time Predict time
                                    score (↑) rank (↓) mean            bility (↓) per 1K [s] per 1K [s]
                                                      rank (↓)
 RealMLP (T+E)      1564−57,+73      0.532      8.6         4.9    1.0    6.4%        6564.71        10.26
 TabM (T+E)         1541−61,+74      0.499      9.4         4.4    4.0    6.7%        3285.87         1.47
 LightGBM (T+E)     1527−45,+49      0.448      9.9         5.5    2.0     8.3%        416.98         2.64
 CatBoost (T+E)     1482−55,+57      0.428     11.7         7.3    0.0    7.6%        1658.41         0.65
 CatBoost (T)       1469−49,+56      0.411     12.2         6.1    2.0     7.8%       1658.41         0.08
 TabM (T)           1447−52,+73      0.410     13.2         6.7    1.0     7.7%       3285.87         0.17
 LightGBM (T)       1446−37,+39      0.359     13.2        10.7    0.0     9.0%        416.98         0.33
 XGBoost (T+E)      1440−47,+50      0.358     13.5         8.2    1.0     9.1%        693.49         1.69
 CatBoost (D)       1427−43,+52      0.369     14.1         7.0    2.0     9.0%          6.83         0.08
 ModernNCA (T+E) 1425−67,+103        0.444     14.2         5.0    3.0     8.4%       4621.67         8.15
 TabPFNv2 (T+E)     1405−76,+83      0.474     15.1         3.1   11.0     8.3%       3030.15        21.44
 XGBoost (T)        1404−44,+49      0.309     15.1        12.2    0.0     9.4%        693.49         0.31
 ModernNCA (T)      1396−44,+55      0.305     15.5         8.6    1.0     9.1%       4621.67         0.47
 TabICL (D)         1383−64,+71      0.380     16.1         4.5    6.0     8.9%          6.63         1.48
 TabM (D)           1343−55,+68      0.282     18.0        11.9    0.0    10.7%         10.49         0.13
 RealMLP (T)        1342−45,+43      0.226     18.1        15.3    0.0     9.8%       6564.71         0.49
 TabPFNv2 (T)       1336−72,+77      0.359     18.4         5.7    1.0    10.4%       3030.15         0.46
 TorchMLP (T+E)     1327−53,+49      0.215     18.8        13.6    0.0    10.3%       2874.67         1.95
 TabPFNv2 (D)       1309−81,+87      0.323     19.7         5.5    4.0    11.4%          3.36         0.31
 ModernNCA (D)      1294−48,+58      0.158     20.5        12.3    1.0    12.6%         14.87         0.31
 TabDPT (D)         1290−72,+79      0.298     20.7         4.8    7.0    12.0%         22.53         8.55
 EBM (T+E)          1286−63,+59      0.182     20.8        11.6    1.0    14.4%       1331.68         0.20
 FastaiMLP (T+E)    1242−64,+64      0.156     23.0        13.4    0.0    13.7%        593.24         4.47
 RealMLP (D)        1238−47,+51      0.103     23.2        19.6    0.0    12.4%         21.86         0.84
 ExtraTrees (T+E)   1236−50,+54      0.123     23.4        15.1    0.0    14.1%        183.02         0.76
 EBM (T)            1231−55,+55      0.132     23.6        16.3    0.0    15.0%       1331.68         0.02
 XGBoost (D)        1225−50,+49      0.115     23.9        18.3    0.0    12.4%          1.94         0.12
 TorchMLP (T)       1220−54,+59      0.111     24.1        20.3    0.0    12.4%       2874.67         0.13
 EBM (D)            1198−66,+64      0.133     25.2        13.2    1.0    16.0%          4.67         0.04
 RandomForest (T+E) 1197−56,+62      0.096     25.2        13.0    1.0    14.9%        373.18         0.77
 LightGBM (D)       1197−45,+44      0.088     25.3        22.3    0.0    13.3%          1.96         0.14
 ExtraTrees (T)     1190−52,+55      0.093     25.6        17.7    0.0    15.1%        183.02         0.09
 FastaiMLP (T)      1154−61,+60      0.070     27.3        21.8    0.0    15.4%        593.24         0.31
 RandomForest (T)   1149−49,+59      0.071     27.5        15.1    1.0    15.9%        373.18         0.09
 TorchMLP (D)       1065−49,+50      0.022     31.2        28.5    0.0    17.2%          9.99         0.13
 FastaiMLP (D)      1007−71,+66      0.022     33.4        30.4    0.0    20.6%          2.86         0.37
 RandomForest (D) 1000−44,+50        0.009     33.7        31.8    0.0    21.0%          0.43         0.05
 KNN (T+E)          984−79,+66       0.027     34.2        30.7    0.0    23.3%        129.01         1.80
 ExtraTrees (D)     980−75,+72       0.024     34.3        30.6    0.0    22.8%          0.25         0.05
 Linear (T+E)       967−110,+72      0.036     34.8        26.8    0.0    28.9%        237.58         0.42
 Linear (T)         936−115,+72      0.027     35.8        30.1    0.0    29.7%        237.58         0.08
 KNN (T)            858−93,+64       0.011     38.0        36.3    0.0    28.8%        129.01         0.18
 Linear (D)         836−136,+84      0.014     38.5        30.8    0.0    32.7%          1.19         0.12
 KNN (D)            614−133,+102     0.000     42.2        41.7    0.0    43.0%          0.19         0.04



We observe that for all models, less than 1% of all configurations reach the time limit of 1 hour. We
further investigate the time limit for the GPU-optimized models in Appendix A.3. For EBMs, we
notice that the training was not stopped early at the 1 hour time limit, positively influencing its results.
As this only concerns a small fraction of hyperparameter trials, we did not rerun the training for
EBM.

A.3   Tabular Deep Learning on GPU vs. CPU

In our main experiments, we ran TabM and ModernNCA on GPU. To further investigate the impact
of hardware choice on these models, we also ran TabM and ModernNCA on CPU. Moreover, we


                                                      31
                                                          Model runtime distribution                                                 108
                                                                                                                                                          Cumulative model runtime distribution
                                      CatBoost
                                      EBM
                                      ExtraTrees
                                      FastaiMLP
                       104            KNN                                                                                            107
                                      LightGBM
                                      Linear
                                      ModernNCA
                                      RandomForest




                                                                                                   Cumulative training runtime (s)
                                      RealMLP                                                                                        106
                                      TabDPT
                                      TabICL
                            3         TabM
                       10
                                      TabPFNv2




Training runtime (s)
                                      TorchMLP                                                                                       105
                                      XGBoost
                                      3600 Seconds


                                                                                                                                     104

                       102



                                                                                                                                     103

                                                                                                                                                                                                  config type
                                                                                                                                                                                                    CatBoost
                                                                                                                                                                                                    EBM
                       101                                                                                                           10   2                                                         ExtraTrees
                                                                                                                                                                                                    FastaiMLP
                                                                                                                                                                                                    KNN
                                                                                                                                                                                                    LightGBM
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Linear
                                                                                                                                     101                                                            ModernNCA
                                                                                                                                                                                                    RandomForest
                                                                                                                                                                                                    RealMLP
                            0                                                                                                                                                                       TabDPT
                       10
                                                                                                                                                                                                    TabICL
                                                                                                                                     100                                                            TabM
                                                                                                                                                                                                    TabPFNv2
                                                                                                                                                                                                    TorchMLP
                                                                                                                                                                                                    XGBoost

                                0.0                     0.2      0.4      0.6          0.8   1.0                                              0.0                     0.2   0.4   0.6     0.8             1.0

                                                Proportion of Model Configurations                                                                           Proportion of Model Configurations

Figure A.9: Training Runtime Analysis, Runtime Distribution (left) and Cumulative Total
Runtime (right) Across Hyperparameter Configurations. We show the training runtime in seconds
for the hyperparameter configurations across models.



                                                          Model runtime distribution                                                                      Cumulative model runtime distribution
                                      ModernNCA                                                                                                 config type
                                      ModernNCA (CPU)                                                                                               ModernNCA
                                      RealMLP                                                                                        108            ModernNCA (CPU)
                                      RealMLP (GPU)                                                                                                 RealMLP
                                      TabM                                                                                                          RealMLP (GPU)
                                      TabM (CPU)                                                                                                    TabM
                                      3600 Seconds                                                                                                  TabM (CPU)
                                                                                                                                     107
                       103




                                                                                                   Cumulative training runtime (s)
                                                                                                                                     106




Training runtime (s)
                                                                                                                                     105

                       102


                                                                                                                                     104




                                                                                                                                     103


                       101


                                                                                                                                     102




                                                                                                                                     101



                       100

                                                                                                                                     100




                                0.0                     0.2      0.4      0.6          0.8   1.0                                              0.0                     0.2   0.4   0.6     0.8             1.0

                                                Proportion of Model Configurations                                                                           Proportion of Model Configurations

Figure A.10: Runtime Analysis of RealMLP, TabM, and ModernNCA on CPU vs. GPU. We
show the training runtime distribution of RealMLP, TabM, and ModernNCA trained on CPU and
GPU across all TabArena datasets. For ModernNCA and TabM on CPU, approximately 16% of runs
are early stopped due to the 1-hour time limit. For GPU, less than 0.1% of runs are early stopped due
to the time limit.




ran RealMLP on GPU. Figure A.10 demonstrates that the hyperparameter configurations of TabM
and ModernNCA train much faster and RealMLP slightly faster on GPU than on CPU. We conclude
from this ablation that training TabM and ModernNCA on CPU with a time limit of 1 hour would
negatively influence their predictive performance. While the influence is marginal for RealMLP, it
seems non-marginal for TabM and ModernNCA.


                                                                                                   32
            Default        Tuned          Tuned + Ensembled                  Default            Tuned           Tuned + Ensembled


       RealMLP                                                          RealMLP
      LightGBM                                                              TabM
           TabM                                                        LightGBM
       CatBoost                                                      ModernNCA
    ModernNCA                                                           CatBoost
       XGBoost                                                          XGBoost
      TorchMLP                                                           TabDPT
            EBM                                                        TorchMLP
        TabDPT                                                               EBM
      ExtraTrees                                                       FastaiMLP
      FastaiMLP                                                        ExtraTrees
   RandomForest                                                     RandomForest
            KNN                                                            Linear
          Linear                   AutoGluon 1.3 (4h)                        KNN                              AutoGluon 1.3 (4h)
                   800   1000      1200      1400       1600                        0.0   0.1    0.2    0.3      0.4     0.5    0.6
                                    Elo                                                           Normalized score


Figure A.11: Benchmark results on TabArena-Lite using Elo (left) and normalized scores
(right). Our main leaderboard with TabArena-Lite, a subset of TabArena consisting of all datasets,
but only with one outer fold.


A.4     TabArena-Lite

Benchmarking can quickly become very expensive, especially with a sophisticated protocol to
guarantee robust results. To reduce the cost of benchmarking, we introduce TabArena-Lite.
TabArena-Lite is a continually maintained subset of TabArena that consists, in its first version, of
all datasets with one outer fold. Figure A.11 shows results on TabArena-Lite, using 200 hyperpa-
rameter configurations per model, but only a single outer fold for all datasets. The results are similar
to the results on TabArena in Figure 1, showing that TabArena-Lite is a good indicator of model
performance.
To further reduce the cost of benchmarking, we also recommend running new models on
TabArena-Lite with one default hyperparameter configuration and optionally with a lower number
of random hyperparameter configurations (e.g., 25). As all other models in TabArena are tuned, a
less heavily tuned model that performs comparably could already show that a new model is promising.
We designate TabArena-Lite to be used in academic studies and find any novel model that outper-
forms other models on at least one dataset, even if it is not among the best on average, a valuable
publication. Furthermore, we as maintainers use the performance on TabArena-Lite to prioritize
the integration of new models into TabArena. We envision TabArena-Lite also as a living, contin-
uously updated subset. Ideally, future work could determine a method that finds the optimal and most
representative subset of partitions and datasets in TabArena to populate TabArena-Lite.

A.5     Investigating Statistical Significance

We investigate the statistical significance between models by using critical difference diagrams
(CDDs) [58] to represent the results of a Friedman test and then a Nemenyi post-hoc test (α = 0.05)
from AutoRank1 [59]. Figures A.12 to A.14 show the CDDs for the full benchmark, TabPFNv2-
compatible datasets, and TabICL-compatible datasets with respect to the peak performance of the
models, i.e., tuned + ensembled where available. We further investigate statistical significance
per-dataset in Appendix F.
We observe that there always exists a group of not statistically significantly different top models
containing at least one deep learning model and GBDT, and when available, TabPFNv2 and TabICL.




   1
       https://github.com/sherbold/autorank


                                                               33
                                     CD
                                   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14




   RealMLP (tuned + ensembled)                                           KNN (tuned + ensembled)
      TabM (tuned + ensembled)                                           Linear (tuned + ensembled)
  LightGBM (tuned + ensembled)                                           RandomForest (tuned + ensembled)
   CatBoost (tuned + ensembled)                                          ExtraTrees (tuned + ensembled)
 ModernNCA (tuned + ensembled)                                           FastaiMLP (tuned + ensembled)
    XGBoost (tuned + ensembled)                                          EBM (tuned + ensembled)
  TorchMLP (tuned + ensembled)                                           TabDPT (default)


Figure A.12: Critical Difference Diagram for tuned+ensembled methods on the full benchmark.
Lower ranks are better; horizontal bars connect methods that are not statistically significantly different.


                                      CD
                                   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15




  TabPFNv2 (tuned + ensembled)                                           KNN (tuned + ensembled)
   RealMLP (tuned + ensembled)                                           Linear (tuned + ensembled)
      TabM (tuned + ensembled)                                           RandomForest (tuned + ensembled)
  LightGBM (tuned + ensembled)                                           ExtraTrees (tuned + ensembled)
   CatBoost (tuned + ensembled)                                          FastaiMLP (tuned + ensembled)
                TabDPT (default)                                         TorchMLP (tuned + ensembled)
    XGBoost (tuned + ensembled)                                          EBM (tuned + ensembled)
 ModernNCA (tuned + ensembled)

Figure A.13: Critical Difference Diagram for tuned+ensembled methods on TabPFNv2-
compatible datasets. Lower ranks are better; horizontal bars connect methods that are not statistically
significantly different.


                                      CD
                                   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15



                TabICL (default)                                         KNN (tuned + ensembled)
      TabM (tuned + ensembled)                                           Linear (tuned + ensembled)
   RealMLP (tuned + ensembled)                                           RandomForest (tuned + ensembled)
  LightGBM (tuned + ensembled)                                           ExtraTrees (tuned + ensembled)
   CatBoost (tuned + ensembled)                                          TabDPT (default)
    XGBoost (tuned + ensembled)                                          FastaiMLP (tuned + ensembled)
 ModernNCA (tuned + ensembled)                                           EBM (tuned + ensembled)
  TorchMLP (tuned + ensembled)

Figure A.14: Critical Difference Diagram for tuned+ensembled methods on TabICL-compatible
datasets. Lower ranks are better; horizontal bars connect methods that are not statistically significantly
different.



                                                   34
A.6     Investigating Tuning Trajectories and Validation Overfitting

In Figure 5 (right), most models appear to have saturated their performance by 201 tuning configs,
indicating that further increasing the amount of configurations beyond 201 is unlikely to lead to
significant improvements without also expanding the model search spaces. ModernNCA’s perfor-
mance peaks at 25 configurations and then progressively degrades with further tuning, which can
be attributed to validation data overfitting during tuning; also often called overtuning [41, 42]. This
can be observed in Figure A.15, where despite ModernNCA being the 6th place model in terms of
Elo when evaluated on the test data, it is the 1st place model when evaluated on the validation data.
In other words, we observe that overtuning occurs since overfitting on the validation data results in
reduced test performance, despite continued improvement in the validation score. Furthermore, the
degree of overfitting for each method varies widely. As seen in Figure A.16, neural network models
overfit much more than other methods, even with far fewer configurations. ModernNCA, in particular,
only needs 10 random configurations ensembled together to overfit more than any non-deep learning
method with 201 ensembled configurations. TabM stands out as the sole exception, demonstrating
remarkable resilience to overfitting, possibly due to its internal ensembling, joint early stopping for
the whole ensemble, and moderately-sized hyperparameter search space.
With these insights, we can now explain why the TabArena ensemble overwhelmingly favors Mod-
ernNCA and RealMLP over other models (Figure 7). The reason is not necessarily because these
models are the correct ones to choose, but rather because the ensemble is optimizing the validation
performance as a proxy for the test performance, and the models that are most overfit on the validation
data will naturally be over-selected by the ensembling algorithm (and likewise for model selection).
Similarly, models that perform very well on test data while avoiding overfitting (such as TabM) are
heavily under-selected by the ensemble. Despite these issues, the TabArena ensemble still drasti-
cally outperforms all methods, including AutoGluon. This indicates that a novel overfitting-aware
method for selecting configurations in the TabArena ensemble could yield significantly improved
performance, further advancing the state of the art. We leave the exploration of such algorithms and
other solutions for overtuning to future work.

       1600   Op                                                                       RealMLP
              tim
                                                                              2200     TabM
                                                                                       CatBoost
               al

       1500                                                                            ModernNCA
                                                                              2000     LightGBM
                                                                                       XGBoost
                                                                                       TorchMLP
       1400                                                                            TabDPT
                                                                              1800     FastaiMLP


                                                                  Elo (Val)
                                                                                       EBM
       1300                                                                            ExtraTrees
                                                                              1600
 Elo   1200
                                                RealMLP
                                                TabM
                                                                                       RandomForest
                                                CatBoost                      1400
                                                ModernNCA
       1100                                     LightGBM
                                                XGBoost
                                                TorchMLP                      1200
       1000                                     TabDPT
                                                FastaiMLP
                                                EBM                           1000
                                                ExtraTrees
        900                                     RandomForest
               100      101       102      10 3            104                       100              101   102   103         104
               Train time per 1K samples (s) (median)                                Train time per 1K samples (s) (median)
Figure A.15: The tuning trajectories of model ensembles for (Left) Elo when evaluated on the test
data. (Right) Elo when evaluated on the validation data. Time is shown as the tuning time with
points from left to right marking ensembles of increasing numbers of random configurations (1, 2, 5,
10, 25, 50, 100, 150, 201). The trajectories are sampled 20 times from all trials and averaged. The
right-most highlighted points use all configurations. The left figure calibrates 1000 Elo to the test
performance of the default random forest configuration. The right figure calibrates 1000 Elo to the
validation performance of the default random forest configuration.




                                                                 35
                                   800           RandomForest
                                                 ExtraTrees
                                                 EBM
                                                 FastaiMLP
                                                 TabDPT




          Elo (Val) - Elo (Test)
                                   600           TorchMLP
                                                 XGBoost
                                                 LightGBM
                                                 ModernNCA
                                                 CatBoost
                                   400           TabM
                                                 RealMLP

                                   200


                                     0
                                         timal
                                         Op

                                          100                   101        102   103      104
                                              Train time per 1K samples (s) (median)
Figure A.16: The validation overfitting tuning trajectories of model ensembles for Elo when eval-
uated on the test data vs. Elo when evaluated on the validation data. The setup is identical to
Figure A.15. A value of 800 on the y-axis means that the configuration has 800 higher elo based on
its validation scores than on its test scores relative to default random forest. Higher values lead to less
reliable estimates of a model’s performance on test data given only its validation scores, and make
effective model selection and post-hoc ensembling more challenging.


B    Data Curation

For initializing the TabArena benchmark, we surveyed all the datasets used in 14 previous benchmark-
ing studies: 450 from PMLB(Mini) [46, 47, 48], 72 from OpenML-CC18 [29], 45 from Grinsztajn
et al. [32], 11 from Gorishniy et al. [30], 11 from Shwartz-Ziv and Armon [31], 176 from TabZilla
[33], 35 from OpenML-CTR23 [34], 104 from AMLB [35], 187 from Kohli et al. [7], 8 from TabRed
[10], 10 from Tschalzev et al. [8], 279 from TabRepo [37], 118 from PyTabKit [20], and 300 from
TALENT [36, 50, 60].
These studies were selected with the goal of covering a wide range of datasets used in tabular bench-
marking so that we can clean up the field from problematic or unsuitable datasets. Therefore, each of
the studies represents a frequently used benchmark or a general milestone study in the field of tabular
machine learning. Note that PMLB(Mini) [46, 47, 48] is not included in table 2 as the reference
publication did not include an evaluation of methods. Combining the dataset collections results in
1053 uniquely named datasets.
For TabArena-v0.1, we aimed at using only those datasets representing realistic, predictive tabular
data tasks that practitioners would be interested in solving. Therefore, we define a set of selection
criteria described in Appendix B.1. Two of the coauthors manually investigated each of the datasets
and applied our selection criteria. We publicly share their notes and curated metadata: tabarena.
ai/dataset-curation. Furthermore, we share insights from our curation process in Appendix B.3
Importantly, we did not exhaustively test each dataset for each of our curation criteria, but proceeded
with the next dataset whenever a dataset clearly met at least one of our criteria for exclusion. Therefore,
Figure 2 represents the first reason for exclusion that we noticed in a dataset.
Surprisingly, only 51 datasets satisfying all criteria remained. Appendix B.2 provides additional
information on the selected datasets. Moreover, we share all tasks and datasets as an OpenML
suite [29, 61, 62] (ID 457, alias "tabarena-v0.1"). We consider our data curation a clean-up for tabular
data benchmarking that is necessary, but imperfect. Therefore, we aim to continuously improve the
data selection and invite researchers to challenge our documented decisions. Appendix E.3 details
protocols to contribute new datasets to TabArena by applying our criteria.


                                                                      36
B.1   Dataset Selection Criteria

The datasets for Tabarena-v0.1 were curated by applying the following criteria:

Unique datasets: We want the TabArena benchmark to be representative of a wide range of tasks
        without overrepresenting particular tasks. Therefore, we conduct a four-stage deduplication
        procedure: (1) Automatically filter data sets by name if they match after transforming to
        the lower case and removing filling characters ’ ’| ’_’ | ’-’. (2) Manually remove datasets
        where different names were used for the same data set in different studies. (3) Manually
        remove alternative versions of the same dataset, i.e., temporal data sampled at different rates,
        or dataset versions with alternative targets. (4) Remove different datasets representing the
        same task from the same source (i.e., a collection of ML for software tasks named kc1-3).
IID Tabular Data: We exclude datasets that are non-IID. More specifically, we exclude datasets
        whose tasks require a non-random split, such as a temporal or group-based split. We leave a
        non-IID realization of TabArena with temporal and time-series data for future work.
Tabular Domain Tasks: We exclude datasets from non-tabular modalities transformed into a tabular
        format. Thus, we exclude featureized image, text, audio, or time series forecasting data.
        Likewise, we exclude problems that would no longer be solved with tabular machine learning,
        such as tabular data of control problems solved nowadays by reinforcement learning. While
        some tasks from other modalities may still be solved using feature extraction and tabular
        learning methods, it is impossible to assess that without domain experts. Instead of making
        uninformed decisions, we exclude all datasets from other domains for TabArena-v0.1. In
        future versions, we consider adding datasets from other domains if there is evidence that
        tabular learning methods are still a reasonable solution for the task. Therefore, we actively
        invite researchers from other domains to share datasets for which they apply tabular learning
        methods.
Real Random Distribution: We exclude purely artificial data, or any subset thereof, generated by
        a deterministic function, by sampling from a seeded random process, or by simulating
        a random distribution. We note that such datasets are still interesting toy functions that
        help analyze the theoretical capabilities of models qualitatively. Yet, they do not represent
        distributions from real-world predictive machine learning tasks. While some simulated
        datasets (i.e., higgs, or MiniBooNE) were conceptualized as machine learning tasks, we
        decided to exclude them for TabArena-v0.1 for consistency.
Predictive Machine Learning Task: We exclude tabular data that does not originally stem from
        a predictive machine learning task for classification or regression. Thus, we exclude
        tabular data intended for scientific discovery tasks such as anomaly detection, subgroup
        discovery, data visualization, or causal inference. In particular, this includes survey data
        never intended for use in a predictive machine learning task. While data from scientific
        discovery applications can be used for predictive machine learning tasks, we only include it
        if the original data source intended its use for predictive machine learning, or if a follow-up
        work re-used the data in a real-world application.
        Moreover, we exclude non-predictive tables, where the target label is not predictable based
        on statistical information from other columns, such as those commonly found in collections
        like WikiTables [63] or GitTables [64].
        We exclude datasets that are trivial to solve and therefore do not represent challenging
        ML tasks allowing to investigate model differences. We define trivial datasets as datasets
        where one of the following criteria applies: (1) at least one of the models in our scope is
        consistently able to achieve perfect performance; (2) multiple models achieve exactly the
        same highest performance. Note that after applying our set of criteria, none of the considered
        datasets was found to be trivial.
Size Limit: We exclude datasets that are tiny or large because they tend to require fundamentally
        different methods. Tiny datasets require a methodological focus on avoiding overfitting,
        while methods for large datasets must be very efficient during training. We aim to include
        tiny and large datasets with dedicated evaluation protocols in future versions of TabArena.
        For TabArena-v0.1, we exclude datasets with fewer than 500 or more than 250, 000 samples,
        measured as the number of training samples after applying our train-test splits. Note that
        after applying our whole set of criteria, none of the datasets was excluded solely due to
        being too large, while many datasets were excluded due to a small sample size.


                                                  37
Data Quality: We exclude datasets that suffer from one of the following data quality issues: (1)
       heavily preprocessed datasets, such as those where the whole dataset was already used for
       preprocessing in a way that leaks the target or any information about the feature distribution
       of the test set (e.g., PCA features computed over all data points); (2) datasets for which we
       could not find sufficient information to judge their source and preprocessing; (3) datasets
       with an irreversible target leak. In general, we try to find the original state of the dataset
       and include it, if applicable. We do not generally exclude preprocessed datasets, as datasets
       are rarely published without any preprocessing, e.g., due to anonymization. We leave a
       benchmark with model-specific, domain-specific pre-processing per dataset for future work.
No License Issues: We exclude any dataset whose license does not allow sharing or using it for an
        academic benchmark. By doing so, we guard the future of TabArena as a living benchmark,
        its maintainers, and, most importantly, its users from legal threat.
       As a result, we exclude several promising datasets, e.g., due to the default license of Kaggle
        competitions. Thus, progress towards a less data-restrictive license on Kaggle could greatly
        benefit the academic community. Likewise, any progress towards sharing more public
        domain datasets for tabular predictive machine learning would be highly beneficial.
Open-access Structured Data API: We exclude datasets that cannot be made to be automatically
       downloaded from a tabular data repository. Eligible data repositories must be open-access,
       i.e., users do not need an account to download data. Furthermore, the repositories require
       a structured data and task representation, including metadata information such as feature
       types, the target column, and outer splits. To the best of our knowledge, only OpenML [62]
       fulfills these requirements so far. If applicable due to licensing, we manually upload datasets
       to OpenML to include them in TabArena. This criterion is necessary to enable automated
       benchmarking and a straightforward user experience.
Ethically Unambiguous Tasks: We exclude datasets with tasks that pose ethical concerns, such as
         the Boston Housing dataset2 . While curating our datasets, we flagged such datasets and
         excluded them. We implore the community to investigate our curated datasets for ethical
         concerns further and immediately notify the maintainers of TabArena about potential
         problems.

B.2     Included Datasets Details

Table B.1 presents the domain coverage of all datasets included in TabArena-v0.1.
Table B.2 presents a detailed overview for all datasets included in TabArena-v0.1. We further share
all tasks and datasets as an OpenML suite [29, 61, 62] (ID 457, alias "tabarena-v0.1"). We share
BibTex and LaTeX code to easily reference datasets from TabArena in our data curation repository:
tabarena.ai/data-tabular-ml-iid-study.

B.3     Noteworthy Observations from Curation

We observed several trends while curating the datasets for TabArena-v0.1. To improve the discussion
related to datasets in our community, we share some noteworthy trends below.

         • For various datasets, it was not possible to automate the selection process, because the
           metadata that would be required is not available. Therefore, given the current state of
           data repositories, we consider that automated curation procedures produce more biased
           results than careful manual curation. Finding out which splits are appropriate for a task, or
           whether the targets were created using deterministic functions, requires substantial effort
           and oftentimes, reading and understanding the papers where datasets were introduced. To
           still make the inclusion of datasets as objective as possible, we introduce a checklist for new
           datasets in Appendix E.3.
         • Most of the datasets excluded due to license issues were Kaggle datasets with restrictive
           licenses, which otherwise would have been well-suited for inclusion. In the future, we hope
           that more high-quality datasets with less restrictive licenses will become available, also on
           Kaggle.
   2
       https://fairlearn.org/main/user_guide/datasets/boston_housing_data.html


                                                    38
Table B.1: Domain Coverage of TabArena-v0.1. We present the domain name, along with the
count and percentage of datasets from each domain, for all datasets in TabArena. We follow the
domain names and categorization of the TALENT benchmark [36]. Note that TabArena does not
have datasets for all categories defined by Ye et al. [36], as these categories conflict with our selection
criteria.
                         Domain                                 Count           %
                        business & marketing                       16    31.37%
                        finance                                     8    15.69%
                        chemistry & material science                6    11.76%
                        medical & healthcare                        6    11.76%
                        biology & life sciences                     5     9.80%
                        technology & internet                       4     7.84%
                        physics & astronomy                         3     5.88%
                        education                                   1     1.96%
                        environmental science & climate             1     1.96%
                        industry & manufacturing                    1     1.96%


       • The large amount of datasets from other modalities seems to be an artifact from times before
         the development of high-performing modality-specific approaches. At least 16 datasets were
         images for handwritten digit or letter recognition. As those tasks are clearly outdated, we
         excluded them. To be consistent, we also excluded datasets consisting of features from
         image data for which we were not able to assess whether the tasks are outdated. Features
         extracted from image data are not an exclusion criterion for datasets in TabArena, as long
         as they represent a meaningful task and tabular models are a reasonable approach to solve
         those tasks.
       • The huge amount of tiny (fewer than 500 training samples) datasets is likely an artifact of a
         time when data collection was done at a much smaller scale than nowadays. Only four of
         the 142 tiny datasets for which we found a publication date were published later than 2010.
         Moreover, many of the tiny datasets seem to have originated in educational content, such as
         books or toy examples in tutorials.
       • Several datasets used in previous benchmarking studies were originally introduced as part
         of a series of AutoML Challenges. Datasets in these challenges were often released (and
         shared) with obscured, non-meaningful names. Most of the datasets are ablated versions
         of other datasets, and therefore have led to unintended duplicates in existing benchmarks.
         Furthermore, many of those datasets were from other domains, like images or text.
       • Of the 254 datasets with alternative versions listed in Figure 2, most are from the PMLB
         benchmark [47] and represent differently parameterized versions of artificially created
         datasets: 118 are Feynman equations and 62 are Friedman data generation functions.
       • Throughout the benchmarks, inconsistent versions of the same datasets were used: tasks
         were binarized, features were removed, and sometimes even targets were changed. This can
         be partially attributed to the misleading versioning system of OpenML. Subsequent versions
         of the same datasets correspond to a different upload with the same name, not necessarily
         an improved version of the same datasets. Therefore, some studies reused the alternative
         versions of the dataset uploaded under the same name for specific studies. In gathering the
         datasets, we disregarded which version of a dataset was used and solely focused on names.
         Therefore, some alternative versions were already filtered for the set of 1053 datasets with
         unique names. In our benchmark, we always searched for the raw version and used the
         dataset with minimal preprocessing.
       • After applying all other criteria, only 51 datasets were found to satisfy the IID criterion,
         while 68 did not. This underscores the findings of Rubachev et al. [10] that all previous
         benchmarks used random splits inappropriately. TabArena aims to end this malpractice.
       • A large number of datasets are tabular but were not intended to be used for predictive tasks.
         Most of these datasets were filtered due to being ’scientific discovery’ tasks, some due to
         quality issues. In general, some of these datasets might still be useful for benchmarking
         if they represent realistic distributions and target functions. However, most of the datasets


                                                    39
Table B.2: Datasets included in TabArena-v0.1. ’Dataset (Task) ID’ represents the OpenML dataset
and task IDs, ’name’ the dataset name, and Ref. the reference corresponding to the dataset. ’N’
represents the no. of samples, ’d’ the no. of features, ’C’ the no. of classes (- for regression tasks),
and ’% cat’ represents the percentage of features that are categorical. ’Subset’ indicates whether the
dataset has been used for the sub-benchmarks focusing on TabPFNv2 (left) and TabICL (right).
 Dataset (Task) ID   Name                                    Ref.         N        d      C   % cat   Subset
 46913 (363621)      blood-transfusion-service-center        [65]         748      5      2   20.0    ✓| ✓
 46921 (363629)      diabetes                                [66]         768      9      2   11.11   ✓| ✓
 46906 (363614)      anneal                                  [67]         898      39     5   84.62   ✓| ✓
 46954 (363698)      QSAR_fish_toxicity                      [68]         907      7      -   0.0     ✓| ✗
 46918 (363626)      credit-g                                [69]         1000     21     2   66.67   ✓| ✓
 46941 (363685)      maternal_health_risk                    [70]         1014     7      3   14.29   ✓| ✓
 46917 (363625)      concrete_compressive_strength           [71]         1030     9      -   0.0     ✓| ✗
 46952 (363696)      qsar-biodeg                             [72]         1054     42     2   14.29   ✓| ✓
 46931 (363675)      healthcare_insurance_expenses           [73]         1338     7      -   42.86   ✓| ✗
 46963 (363707)      website_phishing                        [74]         1353     10     3   100.0   ✓| ✓
 46927 (363671)      Fitness_Club                            [75]         1500     7      2   57.14   ✓| ✓
 46904 (363612)      airfoil_self_noise                      [76]         1503     6      -   16.67   ✓| ✗
 46907 (363615)      Another-Dataset-on-used-Fiat-500        [77]         1538     8      -   12.5    ✓| ✗
 46980 (363711)      MIC                                     [78]         1699     112    8   84.82   ✓| ✓
 46938 (363682)      Is-this-a-good-customer                 [79]         1723     14     2   64.29   ✓| ✓
 46940 (363684)      Marketing_Campaign                      [80]         2240     26     2   34.62   ✓| ✓
 46930 (363674)      hazelnut-spread-contaminant-detection   [81]         2400     31     2   3.23    ✓| ✓
 46956 (363700)      seismic-bumps                           [82]         2584     16     2   25.0    ✓| ✓
 46958 (363702)      splice                                  [83]         3190     61     3   100.0   ✓| ✓
 46912 (363620)      Bioresponse                             [84]         3751     1777   2   0.06    ✗| ✗
 46933 (363677)      hiva_agnostic                           [85]         3845     1618   3   100.0   ✗| ✗
 46960 (363704)      students_dropout_and_academic_success   [86]         4424     37     3   48.65   ✓| ✓
 46915 (363623)      churn                                   [87]         5000     20     2   25.0    ✓| ✓
 46953 (363697)      QSAR-TID-11                             [88]         5742     1025   -   0.0     ✗| ✗
 46950 (363694)      polish_companies_bankruptcy             [89]         5910     65     2   1.54    ✓| ✓
 46964 (363708)      wine_quality                            [90]         6497     13     -   7.69    ✓| ✗
 46962 (363706)      taiwanese_bankruptcy_prediction         [91]         6819     95     2   1.05    ✓| ✓
 46969 (363689)      NATICUSdroid                            [92]         7491     87     2   100.0   ✓| ✓
 46916 (363624)      coil2000_insurance_policies             [93]         9822     86     2   4.65    ✓| ✓
 46911 (363619)      Bank_Customer_Churn                     [94]         10000    11     2   45.45   ✓| ✓
 46932 (363676)      heloc                                   [95]         10459    24     2   4.17    ✓| ✓
 46979 (363712)      jm1                                     [96]         10885    22     2   4.55    ✓| ✓
 46924 (363632)      E-CommereShippingData                   [97]         10999    11     2   45.45   ✓| ✓
 46947 (363691)      online_shoppers_intention               [98]         12330    18     2   44.44   ✓| ✓
 46937 (363681)      in_vehicle_coupon_recommendation        [99]         12684    25     2   88.0    ✓| ✓
 46942 (363686)      miami_housing                           [100]        13776    16     -   6.25    ✓| ✗
                     HR_Analytics_Job_Change_
 46935 (363679)                                              [101]        19158    13     2   76.92   ✗| ✓
                     of_Data_Scientists
 46934 (363678)      houses                                  [102]        20640    9      -   0.0     ✗| ✗
 46961 (363705)      superconductivity                       [103]        21263    82     -   0.0     ✗| ✗
 46919 (363627)      credit_card_clients_default             [104]        30000    24     2   16.67   ✗| ✓
 46905 (363613)      Amazon_employee_access                  [105]        32769    10     2   100.0   ✗| ✓
 46910 (363618)      bank-marketing                          [106, 107]   45211    14     2   57.14   ✗| ✓
 46928 (363672)      Food_Delivery_Time                      [108]        45451    10     -   30.0    ✗| ✗
 46949 (363693)      physiochemical_protein                  [109]        45730    10     -   0.0     ✗| ✗
 46939 (363683)      kddcup09_appetency                      [110]        50000    213    2   18.31   ✗| ✓
 46923 (363631)      diamonds                                [111]        53940    10     -   30.0    ✗| ✗
 46922 (363630)      Diabetes130US                           [112]        71518    48     2   83.33   ✗| ✓
 46908 (363616)      APSFailure                              [113]        76000    171    2   0.58    ✗| ✓
 46955 (363699)      SDSS17                                  [114]        78053    12     3   25.0    ✗| ✓
 46920 (363628)      customer_satisfaction_in_airline        [115]        129880   22     2   77.27   ✗| ✓
 46929 (363673)      GiveMeSomeCredit                        [116]        150000   11     2   9.09    ✗| ✓




          filtered due to this criterion appeared to be relatively simple tasks. That is, some were already
          found to be trivially solvable in other studies, and some contained only a few features. In
          the future, we are open to considering including datasets not initially intended for predictive
          tasks, if no other issues are found, and if one can argue for potential predictive machine
          learning applications.


                                                      40
C       Model Curation

C.1     Implementation Framework Details

We implement models (and their unit tests) based on the AbstractModel framework3 from Auto-
Gluon [19]. In particular, we implement model-specific preprocessing, training, and inference within
the AbstractModel framework for all models. The framework allows us to use all functionalities
from AutoGluon, TabRepo, and in extension scikit-learn [24] to run models in a standardized way.
Moreover, the pipeline logic encompassing models within TabArena is implemented in a tested,
sophisticated framework that is regularly used in real-world applications.
To integrate models in AbstractModel framework, we require two properties of a model implemen-
tation: (I) Iteratively trained models (e.g., GBDTs or MLPs) must support early stopping based on
a time limit. Moreover, they must support the use of externally provided validation data. (II) We
require a default model-specific preprocessing pipeline that handles, if needed, data anomalies such
as NaN values, categorical features, or feature scaling. The model-agnostic preprocessing of the
AbstractModel framework detects categorical features, transforms text or image features, and
cleans common data problems.
The original implementations of some models do not fulfill these requirements; thus, we added
support ourselves or together with the model authors. Our requirements aim to get the most out of
models in a proper benchmark and in real-world pipelines. Early stopping based on a time limit
avoids model failures due to time constraints in benchmarks and is quintessential for integration
into time-constrained, real-world pipelines. Likewise, only models that support externally provided
validation data can be properly used in pipelines with pre-defined validation splits. Finally, different
models require different preprocessing, and relying only on one shared model-agnostic preprocessing
pipeline is inappropriate. We detail the model-agnostic and model-specific below.
Foundation Model Implementation Details. For all foundation models, we refit on training and
validation data instead of using cross-validation ensembles, following recommendations from the
authors of TabPFN and TabICL. We hypothesize that the foundation models do not gain much from
cross-validation ensembles because, unlike other models, they do not utilize the validation data per
fold for early stopping during training. Thus, their in-context learning might benefit more from using
the training and validation data as context for inference on test data.
The foundation models TabPFNv2 and TabICL have been released with restrictions in terms of
dataset size. In particular, TabPFNv2 is restricted to datasets with up to 10, 000 training samples, 500
features, and 10 classes for classification tasks. TabICL is constrained to classification tasks with up
to 100, 000 training samples and 500 features. TabDPT has no size restrictions because it natively
relies on context retrieval, dimensionality reduction, and class codes during inference [23]. For
context retrieval, we use the default context size of 1024 described in the paper. Thereby, we override
the implementation’s default of 128, which we found to perform poorly in preliminary experiments.
We use the newest available checkpoints for all foundation models. For TabDPT, we
use tabdpt1_1.pth. For TabICL, we use tabicl-classifier-v1.1-0506.ckpt. For
TabPFN, we use the defaults for classification tabpfn-v2-classifier.ckpt and re-
gression tabpfn-v2-regressor.ckpt, as well as all other checkpoints during HPO:
tabpfn-v2-classifier-gn2p4bpt.ckpt, tabpfn-v2-classifier-llderlii.ckpt,
tabpfn-v2-classifier-od3j1g5m.ckpt, tabpfn-v2-classifier-vutqq28w.ckpt,
tabpfn-v2-classifier-znskzxi4.ckpt, tabpfn-v2-regressor-09gpqh39.ckpt,
tabpfn-v2-regressor-2noar4o2.ckpt, tabpfn-v2-regressor-5wof9ojf.ckpt,
tabpfn-v2-regressor-wyl4o83o.ckpt.

Model-agnostic Preprocessing. Our model-agnostic preprocessing relies on AutoGluon’s
AutoMLPipelineFeatureGenerator4 . The model-agnostic preprocessing can handle boolean,
numerical, categorical, datetime, and text columns. Importantly, the implementation of a model can
control how the model-agnostic preprocessing treats the input data. As a result, a model could obtain
raw text and datetime columns as input, such that its model-specific preprocessing can handle them.
For TabArena, we let the model-agnostic preprocessing handle text and datetime columns. Text
    3
     https://auto.gluon.ai/stable/tutorials/tabular/advanced/tabular-custom-model.
html
   4
     https://auto.gluon.ai/stable/tutorials/tabular/tabular-feature-engineering.html


                                                  41
columns are transformed to n-hot encoded n-grams. Datetime columns are converted into a Pandas
datetime and into multiple columns representing the year, month, day, and day of the week. Numerical
columns are left untouched. Categorical columns are replaced with categorical codes to save memory
space. The columns are, nevertheless, further treated as categorical. Finally, constant or duplicated
columns are dropped. Importantly, we always keep missing values and delegate handling them to the
model-specific preprocessing.

Model-specific Preprocessing. We perform minimal invasive model-specific preprocessing and
otherwise rely on the preprocessing already implemented within the model’s code. Specifically, we
use the following model-specific preprocessing before passing the data to the model’s code:

      • CatBoost, LightGBM, XGBoost, EBM, TabICL, TabPFNv2, FastaiMLP, and
        TorchMLP do not use any custom model-specific preprocessing and rely entirely on the
        model’s code.
      • RandomForest and ExtraTrees use ordinal encoding for categorical variables. Missing
        values are imputed to 0.
      • TabDPT uses ordinal encoding for categorical variables.
      • RealMLP handles missing numericals by mean imputation with a missingness indicator.
      • TabM and ModernNCA use the numerical quantile-based preprocessing from TabM and
        then use mean imputation with an indicator for numerical features.
      • Linear uses one-hot-encoding, mean or median imputation (hyperparameter), and standard
        scaling or quantile transformation (hyperparameter).
      • KNN uses different numerical and categorical feature encoding techniques as part of the
        search space. For numerical features, either z-standardization or quantile transformation is
        used. For categorical features, a ’cat_threshold’ parameter is defined determining whether
        categorical features are dropped, ordinal-encoded, or one-hot-encoded. If the no. of unique
        values is below the threshold, a feature is one-hot-encoded and otherwise ordinal-encoded.
        A value of 0 means that all categorical features are dropped. Missing numerical values
        are filled with 0. Moreover, KNN uses leave-one-out cross-validation instead of 8-fold
        cross-validation. The leave-one-out cross-validation is natively implemented into the KNN
        model logic and allows for obtaining the validation predictions per sample very efficiently.

C.2   Hyperparameter search spaces

In the following, we list some details and hyperparameter search spaces for different models:

      • The search spaces for CatBoost (Table C.1), LightGBM (Table C.2), XGBoost (Table C.3),
        RandomForest (Table C.4), and ExtraTrees (Table C.5) were determined based on experi-
        ments. We assessed a large set of hyperparameters inspired by the respective documentations
        as well as several papers [e.g., 20, 37, 117] and experimentally determined good ranges
        for them for tuning. We verified that the new search spaces outperform the original search
        spaces on TabRepo [37].
        For gradient-boosted trees, we use the implementation from AutoGluon with its early
        stopping logic and n_estimators=10_000. For Random Forest and ExtraTrees, TabRepo
        fit 300 trees on training+validation data and used out-of-bag predictions for validation. Since
        we want to allow bootstrap=False, which does not support out-of-bag predictions, we
        fit these models using 8-fold CV with 50 estimators per model, resulting in 400 estimators
        overall.
      • For EBM(Table C.6), we use a search space provided by the authors.
      • For RealMLP (Table C.7), we also use a search space provided by the authors. For the
        default parameters, we turn off label smoothing since we are not using accuracy as our
        evaluation metric, as recommended by Holzmüller et al. [20].
      • For TabM (Table C.8) and ModernNCA (Table C.9), we use search spaces coordinated
        with the authors. For the batch size, we choose a training-set-size dependent logic following


                                                 42
  the TabM paper [9]:
                                     
                                     
                                      32      , N < 2800
                                               , N ∈ [2800, 4500)
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                      64
                                     
                                       128     , N ∈ [4500, 6400)
                                     
                        batch_size =
                                     
                                      256     , N ∈ [6400, 32000)
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                      512     , N ∈ [32000, 108000)
                                       1024    , N ≥ 108000 .
                                     

• FastaiMLP (Table C.10) and TorchMLP (Table C.11) were taken from AutoGluon, in
  dialogue with the maintainers/authors.
• Linear (Table C.12) and KNN (Table C.13) were taken from TabRepo. For KNN additional
  preprocessing was added to deal with varying numerical feature distributions and categor-
  ical features. For Linear, we used a log-uniform instead of uniform search space for the
  regularization parameter C.
• For TabPFNv2, we use the search space from the original paper and the official repository,
  in coordination with the authors.
• For TabICL and TabDPT, we only use their default configurations. For TabICL and
  TabDPT, we use the newest checkpoint (see Appendix C.1), unlike the original paper.


             Table C.1: Hyperparameter search space for CatBoost.
   Hyperparameter                  Space
   learning_rate                        LogUniform([0.005, 0.1])
   bootstrap_type                       Bernoulli
   subsample                            Uniform([0.7, 1.0])
   grow_policy                          Choice(["SymmetricTree", "Depthwise"])
   depth                                UniformInt([4, 8])
   colsample_bylevel                    Uniform([0.85, 1.0])
   l2_leaf_reg                          LogUniform([1e-4, 5])
   leaf_estimation_iterations           LogUniformInt([1, 20])
   one_hot_max_size                     LogUniformInt([8, 100])
   model_size_reg                       LogUniform([0.1, 1.5])
   max_ctr_complexity                   UniformInt([2, 5])
   boosting_type                        Plain
   max_bin                              254


              Table C.2: Hyperparameter search space for LightGBM.
               Hyperparameter           Space
                learning_rate             LogUniform([0.005, 0.1])
                feature_fraction          Uniform([0.4, 1.0])
                bagging_fraction          Uniform([0.7, 1.0])
                bagging_freq              1
                num_leaves                LogUniformInt([2, 200])
                min_data_in_leaf          LogUniformInt([1, 64])
                extra_trees               Choice([False, True])
                min_data_per_group        LogUniformInt([2, 100])
                cat_l2                    LogUniform([0.005, 2])
                cat_smooth                LogUniform([0.001, 100])
                max_cat_to_onehot         LogUniformInt([8, 100])
                lambda_l1                 Uniform([1e-4, 1.0])
                lambda_l2                 Uniform([1e-4, 2.0])




                                         43
                   Table C.3: Hyperparameter search space for XGBoost.
                 Hyperparameter        Space
                 learning_rate            LogUniform([0.005, 0.1])
                 max_depth                LogUniformInt([4, 10])
                 min_child_weight         LogUniform([0.001, 5.0])
                 subsample                Uniform([0.6, 1.0])
                 colsample_bylevel        Uniform([0.6, 1.0])
                 colsample_bynode         Uniform([0.6, 1.0])
                 reg_alpha                Uniform([1e-4, 5.0])
                 reg_lambda               Uniform([1e-4, 5.0])
                 grow_policy              Choice(["depthwise", "lossguide"])
                 max_cat_to_onehot        LogUniformInt([8, 100])
                 max_leaves               LogUniformInt([8, 1024])




                 Table C.4: Hyperparameter search space for Random Forest.
                   Hyperparameter               Space
                  max_features                     Uniform([0.4, 1.0])
                  max_samples                      Uniform([0.5, 1.0])
                  min_samples_split                LogUniformInt([2, 4])
                  bootstrap                        Choice([False, True])
                  n_estimators                     50
                  min_impurity_decrease            LogUniform([1e-5, 1e-3])




                   Table C.5: Hyperparameter search space for ExtraTrees.
Hyperparameter               Space
max_features                 Choice(["sqrt", 0.5, 0.75, 1.0])
min_samples_split            LogUniformInt([2, 32])
bootstrap                    False
n_estimators                 50
min_impurity_decrease        Choice([0.0, 1e-5, 3e-5, 1e-4, 3e-4, 1e-3], p=[0.5, 0.1, 0.1, 0.1, 0.1, 0.1])




                   Table C.6: Hyperparameter search space for EBM.
            Hyperparameter                       Space
            max_leaves                                UniformInt([2, 3])
            smoothing_rounds                          UniformInt([0, 1000])
            learning_rate                             LogUniform([0.0025, 0.2])
            interactions                              Uniform([0.95, 0.999])
            interaction_smoothing_rounds              UniformInt([0, 200])
            min_hessian                               LogUniform([1e-10, 1e-2])
            min_samples_leaf                          UniformInt([2, 20])
            validation_size                           Uniform([0.05, 0.25])
            early_stopping_tolerance                  LogUniform([1e-10, 1e-5])
            gain_scale                                LogUniform([0.5, 5.0])




                                              44
Table C.7: Hyperparameter search space for RealMLP. With probability 0.5, either the “Default” or
the “Large” option is chosen for each configuration.
  Hyperparameter                                                      Space
 n_hidden_layers                                     UniformInt([2, 4])
 hidden_sizes                                        rectangular
 hidden_width                                        Choice([256, 384, 512])
 p_drop                                              Uniform([0.0, 0.5])
 act                                                 mish
 plr_sigma                                           LogUniform([1e-2, 50])
 sq_mom                                              1 − LogUniform([0.005, 0.05])
 plr_lr_factor                                       LogUniform([0.05, 0.3])
 scale_lr_factor                                     LogUniform([2.0, 10.0])
 first_layer_lr_factor                               LogUniform([0.3, 1.5])
 ls_eps_sched                                        coslog4
 ls_eps                                              LogUniform([0.005, 0.1])
 lr                                                  LogUniform([0.02, 0.3])
 wd                                                  LogUniform([0.001, 0.05])
 use_ls                                              Choice([False, True])
 early_stopping_additive_patience                    40
 early_stopping_multiplicative_patience              3
                                                     Default (prob=0.5)        Large (prob=0.5)
 plr_hidden_1                                                16             Choice([8, 16, 32, 64])
 plr_hidden_2                                                 4             Choice([8, 16, 32, 64])
 n_epochs                                                    256             Choice([256, 512])
 use_early_stopping                                         False                   True




                      Table C.8: Hyperparameter search space for TabM.
             Hyperparameter               Space
             batch_size                     auto
             patience                       16
             amp                            False
             arch_type                      tabm-mini
             tabm_k                         32
             gradient_clipping_norm         1.0
             share_training_batches         False
             lr                             LogUniform([1e-4, 3e-3])
             weight_decay                   Choice([0.0, LogUniform([1e-4, 1e-1])])
             n_blocks                       UniformInt([2, 5])
             d_block                        Choice([128, 144, 160, . . . , 1008, 1024])
             dropout                        Choice([0.0, Uniform([0.0, 0.5])])
             num_emb_type                   pwl
             d_embedding                    Choice([8, 12, 16, 20, 24, 28, 32])
             num_emb_n_bins                 UniformInt([2, 128])




                                               45
                 Table C.9: Hyperparameter search space for ModernNCA.
           Hyperparameter               Space
           dropout                          Uniform([0.0, 0.5])
           d_block                          UniformInt([64, 1024])
           n_blocks                         Choice([0, UniformInt([0, 2])])
           dim                              UniformInt([64, 1024])
           num_emb_n_frequencies            UniformInt([16, 96])
           num_emb_frequency_scale          LogUniform([0.005, 10.0])
           num_emb_d_embedding              UniformInt([16, 64])
           sample_rate                      Uniform([0.05, 0.6])
           lr                               LogUniform([1e-5, 1e-1])
           weight_decay                     Choice([0.0, LogUniform([1e-6, 1e-3])])
           temperature                      1.0
           num_emb_type                     plr
           num_emb_lite                     True
           batch_size                       auto


                  Table C.10: Hyperparameter search space for FastaiMLP.
Hyperparameter    Space
layers            Choice([[200], [400], [200, 100], [400, 200], [800, 400], [200, 100, 50], [400, 200, 100]])
emb_drop          Uniform([0.0, 0.7])
ps                Uniform([0.0, 0.7])
bs                Choice([128, 256, 512, 1024, 2048])
lr                LogUniform([5e-4, 1e-1])
epochs            UniformInt([20, 50])


                   Table C.11: Hyperparameter search space for TorchMLP.
                        Hyperparameter    Space
                        learning_rate        LogUniform([1e-4, 3e-2])
                        weight_decay         LogUniform([1e-12, 0.1])
                        dropout_prob         Uniform([0.0, 0.4])
                        use_batchnorm        Choice([False, True])
                        num_layers           UniformInt([1, 5])
                        hidden_size          UniformInt([8, 256])
                        activation           Choice(["relu", "elu"])


                  Table C.12: Hyperparameter search space for LinearModel.
                 Hyperparameter            Space
                 C                             LogUniform([0.1, 1000])
                 proc.skew_threshold           Choice([0.9, 0.99, 0.999, None])
                 proc.impute_strategy          Choice(["median", "mean"])
                 penalty                       Choice(["L2", "L1"])


                     Table C.13: Hyperparameter search space for KNN.
Hyperparameter     Space
n_neighbors        Choice([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 20, 30, 40, 50, 100, 200, 300, 400, 500])
weights            Choice(["uniform", "distance"])
p                  Choice([2, 1, 1.5])
scaler             Choice(["standard", "quantile"])
cat_threshold      Choice([0, 1, 5, 10, 20, 30, 50, 100, 1000000])


                                               46
C.3   Cross-validation Ensembles

We employ 8-fold cross-validation ensembles [27] within TabArena. Cross-validation ensembles
function by ensembling models trained on different folds of the cross-validation process. In TabArena,
we obtain 8 fold models. We then ensemble the 8 fold models by averaging their predictions, mirror-
ing a bagging ensemble. The best configuration in the tuned regime is selected using the average
out-of-fold performance over the 8 folds.
Cross-validation ensembles are a powerful alternative to refitting to obtain a final model for de-
ployment. The diversity from bagging the fold models can lead to better predictions. Furthermore,
cross-validation ensembles are more efficient during training because there is no need to spend time
refitting; however, they increase inference time.



C.4   Post-hoc Ensembling

Post-hoc ensembling (PHE) aims to combine a set of models previously evaluated on holdout data
or by cross-validation during model selection (e.g., HPO) to improve performance over any single
model [43, 118]. In particular, PHE relies on using data collected while evaluating models to build its
ensemble, such as predictions on the validation data.
In practice, predictive machine learning systems most often [43] combine a set of models by ag-
gregating their predictions with a weighted arithmetic mean whereby the weights of the models are
commonly obtained using greedy ensemble selection (GES) [1, 119]. Likewise, multiple hyper-
parameter configurations of an individual tabular model can be ensembled with GES, as done in
TabRepo [37] or by TabPFNv2 [5].
Post hoc ensembling with GES has four key advantages: 1) GES is very efficient due to reusing
predictions on validation data previously collected while evaluating models [43, 120]; 2) GES op-
timizes a user-defined target metric using an anytime algorithm; 3) the final ensemble is usually
small since GES produces sparse weight vectors [43, 44]; and 4) the predictive performance of
post-hoc ensembling with GES is superior to the best individual model under mild assumptions
[43, 44, 120, 121].
We build an ensemble of models using GES. In detail, we create an ensemble using the 200 hyper-
parameter configurations that were evaluated during the tuning process. To train the ensemble, we
reuse the predictions on validation data that were computed during (inner) cross-validation. Then,
we obtain a weight vector using GES [1, 119] for all configurations. Finally, we return the weighted
average predictions of all non-zero-weighted configurations.
GES learns a weight vector W = (w1P    , ..., wm ) to combine multiple models fi ∈ F from Pa pool of
m-many models F = (f1 , ..., fm ) as i wi fi . GES ensures that ∀i, 0 ≤ wi ≤ 1 and i wi = 1.
The vector W is learned via a greedy algorithm that runs for a fixed number of iterations N (N = 40
for TabArena). In each step n ≤ N , GES finds i such that increasing wi by 1−w
                                                                             n+1 and decreasing all
                                                                                 i

                   wj
other weights by n+1 , ∀ j ̸= i most reduces the validation error.




C.5   TabArena Ensemble

The TabArena ensemble highlighted in Figure 7 was created by ensembling a portfolio, a set of
hyperparameter configurations across models. Given a portfolio, we evaluate each of its models in
sequence until a time limit is reached or all models have been evaluated. Then, we post-hoc ensemble
[1] all evaluated hyperparameter configurations. For the sake of Figure 7, we simulated the TabArena
ensemble using the result artifacts.
We created a portfolio following the learning procedure introduced by Salinas and Erickson [37] using
leave-one-dataset-out cross-validation with a portfolio of size 200 and 40 ensemble selection steps.
We leave further discussion and investigation of portfolio learning with the results of TabArena to
future work.


                                                  47
D        Evaluation Design Details

D.1       Elo Confidence Intervals

Suppose that the benchmark datasets B = (D1 , . . . , D51 ) are i.i.d. samples from an unknown dataset-
generating distribution PD . We want to compute a confidence interval for the “infinite-datasets Elo
score” Elo(PD , A) of a method A, but can only compute finite-dataset Elo scores like Elo(B, A).
Similar to energies in physics, only relative differences between Elo scores are meaningful, as they
predict win-rates between pairs of methods. We need to choose a reference point to obtain absolute
Elo scores. We consider two variants:

           • Elomean : Center the mean Elo of all methods to 0.
           • EloRF : Center the Elo of default random forest to 1000.

For a ML method A, we compute 200 bootstrap subsamples B̃ of B. The 2.5% and 97.5% quan-
tiles of Elomean (B̃, A) yield an approximate 95% confidence interval [Lmean (A), Umean (A)] for
Elomean (PD , A). Because of
         EloRF (B, A) = Elomean (B, A) + ∆(B),           ∆(B) := 1000 − Elomean (B, RF (default)),
we report the shifted intervals [LA + ∆(B), UA + ∆(B)], which are approximate confidence intervals
for
                                      Elomean (PD , A) + ∆(B) .
They are not good approximate confidence intervals for EloRF (PD , A), because they do not
factor in the randomness in the difference ∆(B) − ∆(PD ) = Elomean (PD , RF (default)) −
Elomean (B, RF (default)). However, this term does not depend on A and therefore does not af-
fect the relative differences of results.

Discussion. The use of Elomean -based confidence intervals explains why the confidence interval
for RF(default) does not have length zero: We use a shift that shifts RF(default) to 1000 on this
specific benchmark B, but that would not shift it to 1000 on the ground-truth distribution PD . We
use Elomean instead of EloRF for confidence intervals because centering the mean instead of a weak
method produces less variance and therefore smaller confidence intervals for strong methods. As a
consequence, plots showing confidence intervals for absolute Elo values allow stronger conclusions
about significance of relative differences in Elo values.

D.2       Sources of Randomness

The comparison and evaluation of models in TabArena is affected by various sources of randomness.
The results in TabArena are affected by the following sources of randomness.

           • Model Randomness, resulting from: initialization, training, non-deterministic computations
             (on GPU or due to precision), inner validation splits (e.g., for early stopping), hyperparameter
             configurations, and the sampling of the hyperparameter configurations.
           • Data Randomness, resulting from: the selected datasets, the inherent sampling bias of each
             data set, and the partitions used for repeated outer cross-validation.
           • Evaluation Randomness, resulting from: metric calculation, and the precision of calculating
             metrics when the metric is used for ranking or normalization.

We guard against data randomness affecting our results by repeating our experiments several times
per dataset. We partially guard against model randomness through repeating experiments and using
many random configurations. Nevertheless, we do not fully guard against it, as we use a fixed random
seed for models5 and a static set of random configurations. We guard against evaluation randomness
by using 100 bootstrapping rounds and a stable Bradley-Terry Elo implementation.
    5
        Future versions of TabArena will no longer use a fixed random seed.


                                                       48
     D.3       Environmental Impact of TabArena

     We are regrettably aware of the negative environmental impact of TabArena. We had several
     discussions about trading off environmental impact and research, but we have not converged on an
     official conclusion to this (philosophical) topic. To share some insights from our discussions, we
     provide several thoughts about the positive environmental impact of TabArena below. We argue that
     some of our key contributions will, over time, offset the negative environmental impact of running a
     large-scale benchmark.

               • We save and share the predictions (along with other metadata) of all models, allowing others
                 to avoid wasting energy by rerunning our experiments to obtain the predictions for future
                 studies.
               • We only simulate post-hoc ensembling on the saved predictions and thus save the computa-
                 tion overhead that could come from post-hoc ensembling, cf. [43, 44, 121].
               • We impose time limits on the training time of a model (per split). Thus, we avoid running
                 configurations of models that would potentially take a very long time to converge, without
                 improving predictive performance. A tighter time limit would save more energy.
               • The large (one-time) cost of running TabArena enables us to find more efficient and better
                 models. Moreover, TabArena enables us to identify portfolios that improve the Pareto
                 frontier in terms of both quality and efficiency. These portfolio configurations can be (and
                 already are) implemented in predictive machine learning systems widely used in industry
                 (e.g., AutoGluon), with applications that result in compute usage far exceeding that of the
                 TabArena benchmark.

     As a result of these contributions, the negative environmental impact of TabArena may be off-
     set through its future applications, resulting in a net reduction of compute usage and a positive
     environmental impact.

     E        Using and Contributing to the Living Benchmark
     E.1       Benchmarking with TabArena

     To benchmark a model, a user must (1) implement their model in the AbstractModel framework;
     (2) create a search space; (3) run the implementation on TabArena or TabArena-Lite; (4) and
     analyze the results. We provide code and more detailed documentation for these three steps in our
     code repositories with examples: tabarena.ai/code-examples. Below, we provide a snapshot6 of code
     snippets for each step: model implementation (Listing 1), search space (Listing 2), benchmarking
     (Listing 3), and analysis of the results (Listing 4).
                       Listing 1: Implementing a custom RandomForest model for TabArena.
 1 import numpy as np
 2 import pandas as pd
 3 from autogluon . core . models import AbstractModel
 4 from autogluon . features import L a b e l E n c o d e r F e a t u r e G e n e r a t o r
 5
 6 class Cu st o mR an d om Fo re s tM od el ( AbstractModel ) :
 7     ag_key = " CRF "
 8     ag_name = " CustomRF "
 9
10            def __init__ ( self , ** kwargs ) :
11                super () . __init__ (** kwargs )
12                self . _feature_generator = None
13
14            def _preprocess ( self , X : pd . DataFrame , is_train = False , ** kwargs )
                  -> np . ndarray :
15                " " " Model - specific preprocessing of the input data . " " "
16                X = super () . _preprocess (X , ** kwargs )
17                if is_train :
         6
             Parts of this snapshot may become outdated due to the benchmarking system being updated.


                                                            49
18                  self . _feature_generator = L a b e l E n c o d e r F e a t u r e G e n e r a t o r (
                          verbosity =0)
19                  self . _feature_generator . fit ( X = X )
20              if self . _feature_generator . features_in :
21                  X = X . copy ()
22                  X [ self . _feature_generator . features_in ] = self .
                          _feature_generator . transform (
23                        X=X
24                  )
25              return X . fillna (0) . to_numpy ( dtype = np . float32 )
26
27        def _fit ( self , X , y , ** kwargs ) :
28            from sklearn . ensemble import RandomForestRegressor ,
                  Ra nd omF ore st Cla ss ifi er
29            if self . problem_type in [ " regression " ]:
30                 model_cls = Ra ndomFo restR egress or
31            else :
32                 model_cls = R an dom Fo res tCl as sif ie r
33
34              X = self . preprocess (X , is_train = True )
35              self . model = model_cls (** self . _get_model_params () )
36              self . model . fit (X , y )

                   Listing 2: Creating a search space for the custom RandomForest model.
 1 def g e t _ c o n fi g s _ f o r _ c u s to m _ r f ( num_random_configs ) :
 2     from autogluon . common . space import Int
 3     from tabarena . utils . config_utils import ConfigGenerator
 4
 5        gen_custom_rf = ConfigGenerator (
 6            model_cls = CustomRandomForestModel ,
 7            manual_configs =[{}] ,
 8            search_space = {
 9                " n_estimators " : Int (4 , 50) ,
10            },
11        )
12        return gen_custom_rf . g e n e r a t e _ a l l _ b a g _ e x p e r i m e n t s (
13            num_random_configs = num_random_configs
14        )

                          Listing 3: Benchmarking the custom RandomForest model.
 1   import openml
 2   from tabarena . benchmark . experiment import run_experiments_new
 3
 4   task_ids = openml . study . get_suite ( " tabarena - v0 .1 " ) . tasks
 5   methods = g e t _c o n f i g s _ f o r _c u s t o m _ r f ( num_random_configs =1)
 6
 7 r u n_experiments_new (
 8       output_dir = " / path / to / output / dir " ,
 9       model_experiments = methods ,
10       tasks = task_ids ,
11       repetitions_mode = " TabArena - Lite " ,
12 )



                 Listing 4: Comparing the custom RandomForest model to the leaderboard.
 1 import pandas as pd
 2 from tabarena . paper . paper _runne r_tab arena import PaperRunTabArena
 3
 4   from . import p o s t _ p r o c e s s _ l o c a l _ r e s u l t s
 5   from . import load_local_results , load_paper_reuslts
 6
 7   repo = p o s t _ p r o c e s s _ l o c a l _ r e s u l t s ()
 8   plotter = PaperRunTabArena ( repo = repo , output_dir = EVAL_DIR )


                                                          50
 9
10   df_results = load_local_results ( plotter )
11   df_results = load_paper_reuslts ( df_results )
12
13 # Create and save the leaderboard figure and table
14 plotter . eval (
15     df_results = df_results ,
16     fr amewor k_typ es_ext ra = list ( df_results [ " config_type " ]. unique () ) ,
17 )




     E.2   Contributing Models

     To include a new model in TabArena, we ask users to open an issue on the TabArena benchmarking
     code repository (tabarena.ai/code) to start the process of adding a model. We envision this process
     not as a static request but as an ongoing interaction between the contributors and maintainers. During
     this process, the goal is to populate the issue over time with the information necessary to integrate a
     model. We require the following information to include a new model:

           1. Public Model Implementation. The model must be implemented in the AbstractModel
              framework (see Appendix C.1), the code for this implementation must be publicly shared,
              and it must pass the default unit test for TabArena models. The implementation should
              represent a standalone model and not, for example, an ensembling pipeline of several
              existing models or sub-calls to other machine learning systems. We leave benchmarking for
              such pipelines, or in general, machine learning systems, to future iterations of TabArena.
              Finally, note that the model can also first be implemented in a scikit-learn API-like interface
              and then wrapped with the AbstractModel framework. This would be the recommended
              workflow in many cases.
           2. Preprocessing and Hyperparameters. The implementation should specify model-specific
              preprocessing (see Appendix C.1). Moreover, the contributor must recommend default
              hyperparameters and a search space for hyperparameter optimization.
           3. Model Verification. The maintainers of TabArena must have reviewed the source code of
              the model. In an ideal process, this review could also help the user to improve their model
              and implementation. In addition, the model should (at least) demonstrate promising results
              on TabArena-Lite. Moreover, if the contributor is not among the original authors of the
              model, the contributor (potentially in coordination with the maintainers of TabArena) shall
              reach out to the original authors to verify the implementation and its optimal intended usage.
              This may involve including the original author in GitHub issues, reviewing the pull request,
              or validating the results.
           4. Maintenance Commitment. While the TabArena team generally maintains model imple-
              mentations, we might need help from the original contributors to resolve future version
              conflicts or outdated functionality. Therefore, contributors must share their preferred way
              of being contacted. Note that the TabArena team may deprecate models that are no longer
              maintainable, consistently outperformed by newer models, or have bugs that cannot be
              reasonably resolved.

     Once the issue is deemed finalized, two maintainers of TabArena need to review and approve the
     issue to complete the model integration.

     E.3   Contributing Data: New Datasets and Curation Feedback

     We envision TabArena to be a platform for discussing benchmarking practices. Therefore, we invite
     users, researchers, and practitioners to challenge our curation decisions or provide curation feedback
     using GitHub issues in the TabArena curation repository: tabarena.ai/data-tabular-ml-iid-study.
     Moreover, we also invite the community to add new datasets and welcome any suggestions for
     datasets that could be included in future versions of TabArena. For a new dataset to be added
     to TabArena, there are two alternative processes: A maintainer-driven process and a user-driven
     process.


                                                       51
In the maintainer-driven process, we welcome GitHub issues with the ‘Dataset Suggestion’ template,
which includes: (1) a link to the raw data, and (2) the dataset license. The TabArena maintainers
will review the suggested dataset by applying the protocol outlined below and, if the criteria are met,
include it in the next version of TabArena.
The user-driven process targets users with a high level of knowledge about the suggested dataset and
requires users to follow our dataset inclusion template. We outline the current template below:

        1. Reference to pull request with a .yaml file including a dataset description following the
           template in the repository.
        2. Reference to a .py file containing a preprocessing pipeline to transform data from the raw
           data source into a format suitable for benchmarking.
        3. A checklist answering the following questions
           (a) Is the data available through an API for automatic downloading, or does the license
                allow for reuploading the data?
           (b) What is the sample size?
           (c) Was the data extracted from another modality (i.e., text, image, time-series)
                    If yes: Are tabular learning methods a reasonable solution compared to domain-
                    specific methods? (If possible, provide a reference).
           (d) Is there a deterministic function for optimally mapping the features to the target?
           (e) Was the data generated artificially or from a parameterized simulation?
            (f) Can you provide a one-sentence user story detailing the benefits of better predictive
                performance in this task?
           (g) Were the samples collected over time?
                    If yes: Is the task about predicting future data, and, if yes, are there distribution
                    shifts for samples collected later?
           (h) Were the samples collected in different groups (i.e., transactions from different cus-
                tomers, patients from multiple hospitals, repeated experimental results from different
                batches)?
                    If yes: Is the task about predicting samples from unseen groups, and if yes, are
                    distribution shifts of samples from different groups expected?
            (i) Are there known preprocessing techniques already applied to the ‘rawest’ available
                data version?
            (j) What preprocessing steps are recommended to conceptualize the task in the preprocess-
                ing Python file?
           (k) Do you have any other recommendations for how to use the dataset for benchmarking?

The maintainers will verify the provided information and engage in discussions if required. After
verifying that the task is reasonable, the dataset will be included in the next benchmark version.

The checklist results from our learnings during data curation and covers the essential aspects where
we had to look closely at the data in our curation process. However, we want to emphasize that we do
not generally exclude datasets using this checklist. On the contrary, for future versions of TabArena,
we aim to explicitly extend the benchmark with tasks that are not covered sufficiently so far, either
due to a lack of high-quality data or due to a lack of domain knowledge to judge the task quality on
our end. Therefore, we encourage users to propose datasets from other domains, non-IID data,
and for any supervised learning task consisting of tabular features where strong performance is
a desired property.

E.3.1     Checklist Examples
In the following, we provide examples of the application of our checklist to one included and one
excluded dataset.
Example for the APSFailure dataset, which represents one of the borderline cases that were included
in TabArena-v0.1:


                                                   52
     a) Is the data available through an API for automatic downloading, or does the license allow
        for reuploading the data? Yes
     b) What is the sample size? 76,000
     c) Was the data extracted from another modality (i.e., text, image, time-series)? Unclear, as
        the data was anonymized. Some features represent histograms, so some of the features
        possibly were extracted from time-series.
              If yes: Are tabular learning methods a reasonable solution compared to domain-specific
              methods? (If possible, provide reference) The data is from a 2016 challenge and
             was provided by a well-known company. Given that the dataset is comparably
              recent and the source is legitimate, we conclude that it still represents a meaningful
              tabular data task.
     d) Is there a deterministic function for optimally mapping the features to the target? No
     e) Was the data generated artificially or from a parameterized simulation? No
     f) Can you provide a one-sentence user story detailing the benefits of a better predictive
        performance in this task? By automatically detecting component failures in trucks, the
        company can save costly manual effort and prevent accidents from releasing trucks
        with faulty components.
     g) Were the samples collected over time? Probably yes.
              If yes: Is the task about predicting future data, and, if yes, are there distribution shifts
              for samples collected later? In a real application, future data would be predicted,
              however, the provided test dataset revealed that no distribution shifts between
              train and test data can be expected as the features are time-invariant.
     h) Were the samples collected in different groups (i.e. transactions from different customers,
        patients from multiple hospitals, repeated experimental results from different batches)? No
              If yes: Is the task about predicting samples from unseen groups, and if yes, are
              distribution shifts of samples from different groups expected? N/A
     i) Are there known preprocessing techniques that have already been applied to the ‘rawest’
        available data version? The feature names were anonymized. Some features were
        preprocessed.
     j) What preprocessing steps are recommended to conceptualize the task in the preprocessing
        Python file? Combine the original training and test files. Convert "na" strings to real
        NaN/missing values for numeric features.
     k) Do you have any other recommendations for how to use the dataset for benchmarking?
          The data originally comes with a cost-matrix, which could be considered in future
        benchmark versions.

Example for the socmob dataset, which was excluded for TabArena-v0.1 as it represents a scientific
discovery task where higher predictive performance is not relevant:

     a) Is the data available through an API for automatic downloading, or does the license allow
        for reuploading the data? Yes
     b) What is the sample size? 1156
     c) Was the data extracted from another modality (i.e., text, image, time-series) No
              If yes: Are tabular learning methods a reasonable solution compared to domain-specific
              methods? (If possible, provide reference) N/A
     d) Is there a deterministic function for optimally mapping the features to the target? No
     e) Was the data generated artificially or from a parameterized simulation? No
     f) Can you provide a one-sentence user story detailing the benefits of a better predictive
        performance in this task? No. The data was collected to empirically test the hypothesis
        that associations between socioeconomic and occupational attributes of fathers and
        sons among sons from intact families are stronger than associations between attributes
        of fathers and sons among sons from any kind of disrupted or reconstituted families.
        The dataset has one target and five predictive features, including the investigated family


                                                  53
          structure. Although supervised (linear) models are applied to the data, the goal is not
          to maximize performance, but to empirically quantify the relationship of one feature
          to the target while controlling for confounding factors (other features).
       g) Were the samples collected over time?        No, the study was cross-sectional and collected
          data in 1973.
               If yes: Is the task about predicting future data, and, if yes, are there distribution shifts
               for samples collected later? N/A
       h) Were the samples collected in different groups (i.e. transactions from different customers,
          patients from multiple hospitals, repeated experimental results from different batches)? No
               If yes: Is the task about predicting samples from unseen groups, and if yes, are
               distribution shifts of samples from different groups expected? N/A
       i) Are there known preprocessing techniques that have already been applied to the ‘rawest’
          available data version? No noteworthy steps.
       j) What preprocessing steps are recommended to conceptualize the task in the preprocessing
          Python file? None.
       k) Do you have any other recommendations for how to use the dataset for benchmarking? Do
          not use the data for benchmarking the capabilities of predictive modeling approaches,
          but maybe for a scientific discovery benchmark in the future.

E.4    Contributing Results: Leaderboard Submissions

We seek to define a process for TabArena to submit to the leaderboard that satisfies the following
principles: (1) Equality: Submitting to the leaderboard is accessible in the same way to everyone.
(2) Transparency: All attempts to submit to the leaderboard are transparent to the public. (3) Re-
producibility: Submitted results are reproducible. (4) Fairness: Cheated results, i.e., by utilizing
the test data in an inappropriate way or simply by submitting manually altered results, are rejected.
(5) : Feasibility: The submission process, in particular the validation, must be manageable for the
maintainers in a reasonable amount of time.
Using these guiding principles, we define our submission process:

       1. To submit results to the leaderboard, users can write a pull request to tabarena.ai/community-
          results that contains:
           (a) An update to the results dataset collection with new data for their model.
           (b) Reproducible and documented code to obtain the results. We require users to start the
               process to add their new model to TabArena (as described in Appendix E.2) and to
               train and evaluate their approach using the provided TabArena benchmarking code.
           (c) A description or link to a description, e.g., a paper, for the new model.
           (d) The following statement: "I confirm that these results were produced using the at-
               tached modeling pipeline and to the best of my knowledge, I have used the test data
               appropriately and have not manipulated the results."
           (e) Indicate whether verification of the submitted results by the maintainers of TabArena
               is requested.
       2. The maintainers will verify that all the required information is present and will proceed
          depending on whether verification was requested:
           (a) Non-verified submission (fast): The request will be merged without recomputing the
               results. Non-verified submissions will not appear on the landing page and will be
               presented as a separate leaderboard on tabarena.ai7 .
           (b) Verified submission: The maintainers will manually review the code and reproduce the
               results for a random sample of outer folds from different datasets. If the results can be
               reproduced successfully and no further issues are found, the request will be merged
               and the results will appear in the main TabArena leaderboard.
   7
      Note that for TabArena-v0.1 no non-validated leaderboard exists on the website. This will change with the
first submission from the community using this protocol.


                                                      54
     We aim to continuously improve our submission process and welcome any feedback or suggestions
     for future versions of TabArena.

     E.5   Running TabArena Models in Practice

     Models integrated into TabArena can be easily used to solve predictive machine learning tasks on
     new datasets, independent of the TabArena benchmark. Listing 5 shows how to run RealMLP on a
     toy dataset from scikit-learn. For more details on this code, please see our code repositories with
     examples: tabarena.ai/code-examples.

                       Listing 5: Running RealMLP from TabArena on a new dataset.
 1 from autogluon . core . data import LabelCleaner
 2 from autogluon . features . generators import
       AutoMLPipelineFeatureGenerator
 3 from sklearn . datasets import load_breast_cancer
 4 from sklearn . metrics import roc_auc_score
 5 from sklearn . model_selection import train_test_split
 6
 7   # Import a TabArena model
 8   from tabrepo . benchmark . models . ag . realmlp . realmlp_model import
         RealMLPModel
 9
10 # Get Data
11 X , y = load_breast_cancer ( return_X_y = True , as_frame = True )
12 X_train , X_test , y_train , y_test = train_test_split (X , y , test_size
        =0.5 , random_state =42)
13
14 # Model - agnostic Preprocessing
15 feature_generator , label_cleaner = A u t o M L P i p e l i n e F e a t u r e G e n e r a t o r () ,
       LabelCleaner . construct ( problem_type = " binary " , y = y )
16 X_train , y_train = feature_generator . fit_transform ( X_train ) ,
       label_cleaner . transform ( y_train )
17 X_test , y_test = feature_generator . transform ( X_test ) , label_cleaner .
       transform ( y_test )
18
19 # Train TabArena Model
20 clf = RealMLPModel ()
21 clf . fit ( X = X_train , y = y_train )
22
23 # Predict and score
24 p r e di c t io n _ pr o b ab i l it i e s = clf . predict_proba ( X = X_test )
25 print ( " ROC AUC : " , roc_auc_score ( y_test , p r ed i c ti o n _p r o ba b i li t i es ) )




     E.6   Handling Foul Play and Dataset Contamination

     A fundamental limitation of open-source benchmarking is that foul play and dataset contamination
     could compromise the leaderboard of TabArena. Model developers could overfit the hyperparameters
     of their model on the TabArena datasets, or use them for pretraining a foundation model.
     Below, we provide a discussion on handling foul play and benchmarking foundation models with
     dataset contamination. In the future, we aim to explore various solutions to these challenges with
     TabArena to keep our leaderboard representative for practitioners.
     Avoiding Foul Play. Foul play will inevitably affect TabArena. Thus, we, as maintainers, have
     considered future guards against foul play in four ways:

           1. A simple mitigation is to provide leaderboards excluding models with potential contamina-
              tion, and, in addition, a leaderboard that includes all models.
           2. Another solution is a healthy dose of suspension by the maintainers. We will generally
              investigate reasons for better (or worse) performance per dataset, given model outliers.
              Given that model providers can train on TabArena’s datasets, we expect that for LLM-based
              approaches, model providers perform memorization tests [122]. For tabular foundation


                                                     55
         models, we currently have no way of detecting contamination and do not know if such
         models can “remember” the data in a significant way, as is the case for text- or vision-based
         models. Here, future research and tools, akin to the work by Bordt et al. [122], are needed.
      3. One significant difference between fighting foul play and data contamination in LLM
         benchmarks, such as ChatbotArena [39], to TabArena is that our official leaderboard
         requires an open mode (code, data, and result artifacts), which makes potential abuse
         easier to spot by the community. We do not want to rule out benchmarking API-based
         closed-source models in the future, so this might also not be a silver bullet.
      4. Lastly, we believe that the living benchmark itself will detect foul play across future iterations
         as new datasets, potentially changing (the seed of) the dataset splits, or new tools to detect
         foul play will inevitably be added to the TabArena ecosystem.

A shared characteristic among the various future guards is the need to update and maintain the
benchmark. Thus, we posit that the strongest protection against foul play is to keep TabArena alive.
Possible Data Contamination in TabArena. It is likely that many benchmarked models were
developed or validated on datasets included in TabArena. Since most publications do not disclose
this information, the extent of this issue cannot be estimated. Moreover, we do not wish to penalize
methods for being transparent about their training and evaluation data. Therefore, we only discuss
data contamination and not benchmark overfitting. In TabArena-v0.1, TabDPT is the only model
directly pretrained on benchmark datasets, covering seven tasks (KDDCup09_appetency, QSAR-
TID-11, Amazon_employee_access, APSFailure, wine_quality, Diabetes130US, heloc). Notably,
the model is outperformed by others on most of these datasets, showing a clear advantage only
on wine_quality. Although contamination cannot be ruled out entirely, it appears unlikely that the
performance of TabDPT is unfairly overestimated compared to others. Therefore, we decided against
taking immediate countermeasures. Nevertheless, as contamination could become a serious issue
in the future, we will remain cautious when adding models that may have been developed using
TabArena datasets.
Benchmarking Foundation Models with Dataset Contamination. Foundation models for tabular
data are increasingly trained on real-world data, and often the pretraining data overlaps with the
dataset in prior benchmarks; cf. [23, 123, 124, 125]. As a result, we inevitably expect that TabArena
will be used to evaluate foundation models that have been trained on some or all of the datasets
from TabArena. While we could exclude such models and ignore the problem, this would contradict
our goal of benchmarking the state-of-the-art in machine learning on tabular data. Thus, we must
consider a future in which we incorporate such models into TabArena. Therefore, we provide a brief
discussion on approaches for benchmarking foundation models with dataset contamination below.
The most straightforward approach is to inform practitioners that dataset contamination might exist.
For instance, TabArena could follow the lead of GIFT-Eval [56], which recently introduced a boolean
“TestData Leakage“ column to the leaderboard. Likewise, one could provide leaderboards with and
without models suspected of dataset contamination.
An alternative, more aggressive approach could be to require models that are submitted not to be
trained on the datasets from TabArena. The main problem with requiring model developers to provide
a “leak-free” version of their foundation models is that we would not benchmark the model used in
practice. Thus, our benchmark would not be helpful to practitioners who need to decide between
specific models. To explain, consider that we would use a leak-free version as a proxy; then, we need
to guarantee that the checkpoint of the leak-free version performs similarly to the original checkpoint,
as if one were to change only the pretraining data. However, in deep learning, we generally lack
a robust method for pretraining models. In most cases, pretraining requires considerable attention
for each training run, such as manually setting learning hyperparameters. Due to the complexity of
deep learning, there is no efficient or straightforward way to guarantee that different checkpoints
trained on different datasets are representative of each other or achieve maximum performance given
their respective datasets. Thus, using a leak-free version as a proxy would most likely not result in
accurately benchmarking the best version of the model that practitioners would use.
We conclude that it is debatable how best to benchmark foundation models with dataset contamination.
As a minimal measure, TabArena could communicate the presence of dataset contamination. More
effective measures require more research. Consequently, we must keep updating TabArena to
incorporate more effective measures in the future, assuming future work can identify such measures.


                                                   56
F   Performance Results Per Dataset
This section presents the performance per dataset for all methods in TabArena-v0.1.




                                               57
Table F.1: Performance Per Dataset. We show the average predictive performance per dataset
with the standard deviation over folds. We show the performance for the default hyperparameter
configuration (Default), for the model after tuning (Tuned), and for the ensemble after tuning
(Tuned + Ens.). We highlight the best-performing methods with significance on three levels: (1)
Green: The best performing method on average; (2) Bold: Methods that are not significantly worse
than the best method on average, based on a Wilcoxon Signed-Rank test for paired samples with
Holm-Bonferroni correction and α = 0.05. (3) Underlined: Methods that are not significantly worse
than the best method in the same pipeline regime (Default, Tuned, or Tuned + Ens.), based on a
Wilcoxon Signed-Rank test for paired samples with Holm-Bonferroni correction and α = 0.05. We
exclude AutoGluon for significance tests in the Tuned + Ens. regime.
                 APSFailure (AUC ↑)                                         Amazon_employee_access (AUC ↑)
              Default          Tuned             Tuned + Ens.                     Default         Tuned           Tuned + Ens.
 RF           0.990 ± 0.002    0.990 ± 0.002     0.990 ± 0.002       RF           0.839 ± 0.005   0.841 ± 0.005   0.849 ± 0.005
 ExtraTrees   0.990 ± 0.002    0.990 ± 0.003     0.991 ± 0.002       ExtraTrees   0.833 ± 0.006   0.841 ± 0.007   0.845 ± 0.006
 XGBoost      0.992 ± 0.002    0.992 ± 0.002     0.992 ± 0.002       XGBoost      0.834 ± 0.007   0.859 ± 0.008   0.862 ± 0.008
 LightGBM     0.992 ± 0.002    0.992 ± 0.002     0.992 ± 0.002       LightGBM     0.843 ± 0.009   0.850 ± 0.007   0.858 ± 0.009
 CatBoost     0.992 ± 0.003    0.992 ± 0.002     0.992 ± 0.003       CatBoost     0.882 ± 0.008   0.883 ± 0.008   0.883 ± 0.007
 EBM          0.991 ± 0.002    0.991 ± 0.002     0.991 ± 0.002       EBM          0.839 ± 0.006   0.841 ± 0.007   0.842 ± 0.006
 FastAIMLP    0.988 ± 0.003    0.989 ± 0.002     0.991 ± 0.002       FastAIMLP    0.854 ± 0.007   0.853 ± 0.008   0.866 ± 0.007
 TorchMLP     0.990 ± 0.002    0.991 ± 0.002     0.992 ± 0.001       TorchMLP     0.835 ± 0.007   0.838 ± 0.006   0.849 ± 0.007
 RealMLP      0.991 ± 0.002    0.991 ± 0.002     0.992 ± 0.002       RealMLP      0.844 ± 0.007   0.846 ± 0.008   0.864 ± 0.008
 TabM         0.992 ± 0.002    0.992 ± 0.002     0.993 ± 0.002       TabM         0.833 ± 0.009   0.842 ± 0.009   0.849 ± 0.009
 MNCA         0.991 ± 0.003    0.991 ± 0.002     0.993 ± 0.002       MNCA         0.846 ± 0.008   0.860 ± 0.008   0.869 ± 0.007
 TabPFNv2     -                -                 -                   TabPFNv2     -               -               -
 TabDPT       0.990 ± 0.003    -                 -                   TabDPT       0.841 ± 0.006   -               -
 TabICL       0.993 ± 0.002    -                 -                   TabICL       0.854 ± 0.006   -               -
 Linear       0.988 ± 0.002    0.988 ± 0.002     0.990 ± 0.001       Linear       0.848 ± 0.009   0.850 ± 0.008   0.851 ± 0.008
 KNN          0.960 ± 0.005    0.985 ± 0.002     0.990 ± 0.002       KNN          0.750 ± 0.006   0.817 ± 0.006   0.852 ± 0.006
 AutoGluon    -                -                 0.993 ± 0.002       AutoGluon    -               -               0.882 ± 0.005


    Another-Dataset-on-used-Fiat-500 (rmse ↓)                                Bank_Customer_Churn (AUC ↑)
              Default         Tuned            Tuned + Ens.                       Default         Tuned           Tuned + Ens.
 RF         750.8 ± 28.4      736.5 ± 24.8     735.4 ± 25.3          RF           0.851 ± 0.008   0.857 ± 0.008   0.858 ± 0.008
 ExtraTrees 744.2 ± 29.5      735.8 ± 26.5     735.1 ± 26.7          ExtraTrees   0.851 ± 0.006   0.860 ± 0.007   0.861 ± 0.007
 XGBoost    754.6 ± 23.0      741.4 ± 22.2     737.1 ± 22.6          XGBoost      0.864 ± 0.009   0.866 ± 0.010   0.866 ± 0.010
 LightGBM 746.0 ± 22.4        740.4 ± 24.6     729.4 ± 22.7          LightGBM     0.864 ± 0.009   0.866 ± 0.009   0.867 ± 0.009
 CatBoost   738.1 ± 20.8      736.3 ± 21.8     732.9 ± 21.9          CatBoost     0.870 ± 0.009   0.870 ± 0.009   0.870 ± 0.009
 EBM        749.9 ± 22.9      750.0 ± 24.1     745.7 ± 23.6          EBM          0.862 ± 0.010   0.864 ± 0.010   0.864 ± 0.010
 FastAIMLP 760.5 ± 17.6       761.2 ± 21.6     756.3 ± 21.4          FastAIMLP    0.859 ± 0.009   0.863 ± 0.007   0.864 ± 0.008
 TorchMLP 775.0 ± 26.3        769.8 ± 25.0     765.0 ± 24.7          TorchMLP     0.860 ± 0.008   0.866 ± 0.008   0.866 ± 0.008
 RealMLP    757.4 ± 23.8      756.0 ± 22.4     726.6 ± 24.0          RealMLP      0.866 ± 0.009   0.870 ± 0.009   0.871 ± 0.009
 TabM       752.1 ± 23.3      755.0 ± 25.0     748.0 ± 22.8          TabM         0.869 ± 0.010   0.871 ± 0.010   0.871 ± 0.010
 MNCA       753.7 ± 27.0      748.2 ± 27.6     731.1 ± 28.2          MNCA         0.864 ± 0.008   0.869 ± 0.008   0.869 ± 0.008
 TabPFNv2 727.7 ± 23.8        733.2 ± 27.2     727.4 ± 26.0          TabPFNv2     0.872 ± 0.009   0.874 ± 0.009   0.874 ± 0.008
 TabDPT     724.0 ± 22.1      -                -                     TabDPT       0.859 ± 0.008   -               -
 TabICL     -                 -                -                     TabICL       0.868 ± 0.009   -               -
 Linear     793.8 ± 25.4      764.2 ± 19.2     764.4 ± 19.3          Linear       0.772 ± 0.010   0.773 ± 0.010   0.773 ± 0.010
 KNN        823.7 ± 28.9      801.5 ± 29.5     782.2 ± 27.7          KNN          0.814 ± 0.010   0.827 ± 0.009   0.839 ± 0.007
 AutoGluon -                  -                729.6 ± 24.6          AutoGluon    -               -               0.869 ± 0.009


                 Bioresponse (AUC ↑)                                               Diabetes130US (AUC ↑)
              Default          Tuned             Tuned + Ens.                     Default         Tuned           Tuned + Ens.
 RF           0.873 ± 0.007    0.873 ± 0.007     0.876 ± 0.006       RF           0.631 ± 0.006   0.656 ± 0.008   0.657 ± 0.008
 ExtraTrees   0.867 ± 0.008    0.868 ± 0.009     0.871 ± 0.008       ExtraTrees   0.623 ± 0.009   0.651 ± 0.007   0.653 ± 0.008
 XGBoost      0.873 ± 0.008    0.875 ± 0.008     0.876 ± 0.008       XGBoost      0.662 ± 0.008   0.668 ± 0.008   0.670 ± 0.008
 LightGBM     0.872 ± 0.008    0.874 ± 0.007     0.875 ± 0.008       LightGBM     0.648 ± 0.008   0.668 ± 0.007   0.672 ± 0.008
 CatBoost     0.872 ± 0.009    0.875 ± 0.008     0.874 ± 0.008       CatBoost     0.671 ± 0.008   0.671 ± 0.008   0.672 ± 0.008
 EBM          0.852 ± 0.009    0.863 ± 0.008     0.866 ± 0.008       EBM          0.659 ± 0.008   0.662 ± 0.007   0.665 ± 0.008
 FastAIMLP    0.850 ± 0.011    0.857 ± 0.010     0.860 ± 0.010       FastAIMLP    0.647 ± 0.007   0.656 ± 0.008   0.662 ± 0.008
 TorchMLP     0.846 ± 0.008    0.856 ± 0.009     0.863 ± 0.008       TorchMLP     0.655 ± 0.007   0.663 ± 0.009   0.667 ± 0.009
 RealMLP      0.858 ± 0.009    0.864 ± 0.008     0.875 ± 0.008       RealMLP      0.659 ± 0.005   0.662 ± 0.008   0.669 ± 0.008
 TabM         0.863 ± 0.005    0.871 ± 0.007     0.873 ± 0.007       TabM         0.660 ± 0.007   0.662 ± 0.008   0.663 ± 0.008
 MNCA         0.860 ± 0.010    0.865 ± 0.007     0.874 ± 0.008       MNCA         0.658 ± 0.008   0.662 ± 0.008   0.666 ± 0.008
 TabPFNv2     -                -                 -                   TabPFNv2     -               -               -
 TabDPT       0.862 ± 0.010    -                 -                   TabDPT       0.609 ± 0.008   -               -
 TabICL       -                -                 -                   TabICL       0.647 ± 0.008   -               -
 Linear       0.789 ± 0.011    0.810 ± 0.009     0.817 ± 0.009       Linear       0.648 ± 0.008   0.658 ± 0.008   0.659 ± 0.008
 KNN          0.818 ± 0.015    0.837 ± 0.011     0.846 ± 0.010       KNN          0.542 ± 0.006   0.633 ± 0.005   0.651 ± 0.006
 AutoGluon    -                -                 0.878 ± 0.007       AutoGluon    -               -               0.673 ± 0.008


                                                                58
       E-CommereShippingData (AUC ↑)                                             Fitness_Club (AUC ↑)

              Default         Tuned           Tuned + Ens.                     Default         Tuned           Tuned + Ens.
RF            0.739 ± 0.005   0.740 ± 0.006   0.741 ± 0.005       RF           0.775 ± 0.018   0.801 ± 0.015   0.800 ± 0.015
ExtraTrees    0.737 ± 0.006   0.741 ± 0.006   0.740 ± 0.005       ExtraTrees   0.769 ± 0.018   0.816 ± 0.013   0.815 ± 0.014
XGBoost       0.740 ± 0.006   0.742 ± 0.007   0.742 ± 0.006       XGBoost      0.798 ± 0.015   0.808 ± 0.015   0.808 ± 0.015
LightGBM      0.739 ± 0.006   0.740 ± 0.005   0.741 ± 0.006       LightGBM     0.795 ± 0.015   0.815 ± 0.015   0.814 ± 0.015
CatBoost      0.744 ± 0.006   0.742 ± 0.007   0.741 ± 0.007       CatBoost     0.814 ± 0.014   0.812 ± 0.015   0.811 ± 0.015
EBM           0.744 ± 0.004   0.743 ± 0.005   0.743 ± 0.004       EBM          0.813 ± 0.015   0.810 ± 0.015   0.812 ± 0.015
FastAIMLP     0.737 ± 0.005   0.741 ± 0.007   0.741 ± 0.007       FastAIMLP    0.806 ± 0.013   0.814 ± 0.013   0.814 ± 0.014
TorchMLP      0.737 ± 0.008   0.740 ± 0.007   0.741 ± 0.007       TorchMLP     0.813 ± 0.016   0.813 ± 0.017   0.814 ± 0.016
RealMLP       0.741 ± 0.007   0.742 ± 0.007   0.742 ± 0.007       RealMLP      0.812 ± 0.015   0.814 ± 0.015   0.816 ± 0.014
TabM          0.744 ± 0.008   0.740 ± 0.005   0.743 ± 0.006       TabM         0.818 ± 0.014   0.818 ± 0.014   0.818 ± 0.014
MNCA          0.741 ± 0.010   0.741 ± 0.006   0.741 ± 0.004       MNCA         0.817 ± 0.014   0.814 ± 0.015   0.801 ± 0.017
TabPFNv2      0.744 ± 0.007   0.744 ± 0.007   0.744 ± 0.006       TabPFNv2     0.822 ± 0.012   0.820 ± 0.013   0.817 ± 0.013
TabDPT        0.735 ± 0.007   -               -                   TabDPT       0.818 ± 0.014   -               -
TabICL        0.743 ± 0.006   -               -                   TabICL       0.819 ± 0.013   -               -
Linear        0.704 ± 0.006   0.722 ± 0.008   0.722 ± 0.008       Linear       0.819 ± 0.014   0.819 ± 0.015   0.819 ± 0.015
KNN           0.703 ± 0.006   0.736 ± 0.008   0.733 ± 0.005       KNN          0.722 ± 0.026   0.786 ± 0.016   0.798 ± 0.016
AutoGluon     -               -               0.738 ± 0.005       AutoGluon    -               -               0.811 ± 0.012


             Food_Delivery_Time (rmse ↓)                                       GiveMeSomeCredit (AUC ↑)

              Default         Tuned           Tuned + Ens.                     Default         Tuned           Tuned + Ens.
RF            7.855 ± 0.041   7.587 ± 0.046   7.588 ± 0.046       RF           0.846 ± 0.003   0.862 ± 0.003   0.863 ± 0.003
ExtraTrees    8.179 ± 0.045   7.753 ± 0.053   7.749 ± 0.053       ExtraTrees   0.840 ± 0.003   0.857 ± 0.002   0.857 ± 0.003
XGBoost       7.397 ± 0.055   7.397 ± 0.055   7.400 ± 0.055       XGBoost      0.865 ± 0.002   0.866 ± 0.002   0.866 ± 0.002
LightGBM      7.616 ± 0.053   7.378 ± 0.054   7.374 ± 0.053       LightGBM     0.865 ± 0.002   0.866 ± 0.002   0.867 ± 0.002
CatBoost      7.379 ± 0.051   7.367 ± 0.051   7.368 ± 0.051       CatBoost     0.866 ± 0.002   0.867 ± 0.002   0.867 ± 0.002
EBM           7.433 ± 0.040   7.424 ± 0.051   7.412 ± 0.044       EBM          0.864 ± 0.002   0.865 ± 0.002   0.865 ± 0.002
FastAIMLP     8.188 ± 0.053   8.085 ± 0.056   8.060 ± 0.052       FastAIMLP    0.829 ± 0.004   0.843 ± 0.005   0.847 ± 0.003
TorchMLP      7.735 ± 0.059   7.579 ± 0.049   7.559 ± 0.052       TorchMLP     0.863 ± 0.002   0.864 ± 0.002   0.865 ± 0.002
RealMLP       7.926 ± 0.053   7.453 ± 0.051   7.414 ± 0.046       RealMLP      0.865 ± 0.002   0.866 ± 0.002   0.866 ± 0.002
TabM          7.760 ± 0.050   7.651 ± 0.053   7.651 ± 0.052       TabM         0.866 ± 0.002   0.867 ± 0.002   0.867 ± 0.002
MNCA          7.486 ± 0.044   7.421 ± 0.045   7.379 ± 0.047       MNCA         0.866 ± 0.002   0.866 ± 0.002   0.867 ± 0.002
TabPFNv2      -               -               -                   TabPFNv2     -               -               -
TabDPT        7.551 ± 0.042   -               -                   TabDPT       0.842 ± 0.003   -               -
TabICL        -               -               -                   TabICL       0.866 ± 0.002   -               -
Linear        8.564 ± 0.047   8.340 ± 0.063   8.277 ± 0.055       Linear       0.841 ± 0.002   0.841 ± 0.002   0.841 ± 0.002
KNN           8.563 ± 0.042   8.042 ± 0.048   7.909 ± 0.049       KNN          0.747 ± 0.004   0.858 ± 0.002   0.859 ± 0.002
AutoGluon     -               -               7.362 ± 0.051       AutoGluon    -               -               0.867 ± 0.002


      HR_Analytics_Job_Change (AUC ↑)                                     Is-this-a-good-customer (AUC ↑)

              Default         Tuned           Tuned + Ens.                     Default         Tuned           Tuned + Ens.
RF            0.789 ± 0.006   0.802 ± 0.006   0.802 ± 0.006       RF           0.721 ± 0.020   0.727 ± 0.018   0.729 ± 0.020
ExtraTrees    0.784 ± 0.007   0.800 ± 0.007   0.801 ± 0.007       ExtraTrees   0.695 ± 0.021   0.713 ± 0.022   0.718 ± 0.024
XGBoost       0.805 ± 0.006   0.803 ± 0.005   0.805 ± 0.006       XGBoost      0.723 ± 0.021   0.742 ± 0.023   0.744 ± 0.022
LightGBM      0.802 ± 0.007   0.803 ± 0.007   0.804 ± 0.006       LightGBM     0.724 ± 0.020   0.741 ± 0.022   0.746 ± 0.020
CatBoost      0.804 ± 0.006   0.804 ± 0.006   0.804 ± 0.006       CatBoost     0.748 ± 0.020   0.743 ± 0.019   0.744 ± 0.019
EBM           0.800 ± 0.006   0.800 ± 0.006   0.801 ± 0.006       EBM          0.751 ± 0.019   0.745 ± 0.018   0.748 ± 0.018
FastAIMLP     0.801 ± 0.005   0.801 ± 0.007   0.803 ± 0.007       FastAIMLP    0.711 ± 0.018   0.742 ± 0.025   0.745 ± 0.017
TorchMLP      0.801 ± 0.006   0.801 ± 0.006   0.803 ± 0.006       TorchMLP     0.728 ± 0.020   0.727 ± 0.023   0.733 ± 0.018
RealMLP       0.801 ± 0.007   0.801 ± 0.006   0.803 ± 0.006       RealMLP      0.732 ± 0.023   0.731 ± 0.025   0.742 ± 0.020
TabM          0.801 ± 0.007   0.803 ± 0.006   0.803 ± 0.006       TabM         0.744 ± 0.022   0.743 ± 0.019   0.744 ± 0.019
MNCA          0.801 ± 0.006   0.802 ± 0.007   0.803 ± 0.007       MNCA         0.738 ± 0.024   0.732 ± 0.020   0.705 ± 0.024
TabPFNv2      -               -               -                   TabPFNv2     0.746 ± 0.019   0.735 ± 0.022   0.743 ± 0.018
TabDPT        0.801 ± 0.006   -               -                   TabDPT       0.742 ± 0.016   -               -
TabICL        0.805 ± 0.006   -               -                   TabICL       0.744 ± 0.019   -               -
Linear        0.796 ± 0.006   0.798 ± 0.005   0.797 ± 0.005       Linear       0.738 ± 0.021   0.735 ± 0.020   0.738 ± 0.021
KNN           0.745 ± 0.007   0.789 ± 0.007   0.798 ± 0.007       KNN          0.652 ± 0.037   0.741 ± 0.024   0.730 ± 0.023
AutoGluon     -               -               0.805 ± 0.007       AutoGluon    -               -               0.745 ± 0.019




                                                             59
                    MIC (logloss ↓)                                        Marketing_Campaign (AUC ↑)

              Default         Tuned           Tuned + Ens.                     Default         Tuned           Tuned + Ens.
RF            0.513 ± 0.031   0.485 ± 0.023   0.474 ± 0.019       RF           0.883 ± 0.015   0.881 ± 0.016   0.882 ± 0.015
ExtraTrees    0.521 ± 0.030   0.482 ± 0.020   0.470 ± 0.018       ExtraTrees   0.884 ± 0.015   0.886 ± 0.015   0.888 ± 0.015
XGBoost       0.470 ± 0.020   0.440 ± 0.019   0.440 ± 0.019       XGBoost      0.897 ± 0.015   0.903 ± 0.016   0.904 ± 0.015
LightGBM      0.503 ± 0.019   0.453 ± 0.020   0.453 ± 0.019       LightGBM     0.901 ± 0.014   0.911 ± 0.015   0.911 ± 0.014
CatBoost      0.455 ± 0.020   0.453 ± 0.019   0.451 ± 0.018       CatBoost     0.907 ± 0.015   0.904 ± 0.014   0.903 ± 0.015
EBM           0.475 ± 0.018   0.446 ± 0.016   0.445 ± 0.016       EBM          0.903 ± 0.015   0.905 ± 0.015   0.906 ± 0.016
FastAIMLP     0.506 ± 0.024   0.462 ± 0.023   0.450 ± 0.020       FastAIMLP    0.890 ± 0.017   0.905 ± 0.015   0.909 ± 0.014
TorchMLP      0.473 ± 0.019   0.465 ± 0.024   0.453 ± 0.017       TorchMLP     0.898 ± 0.015   0.910 ± 0.014   0.915 ± 0.013
RealMLP       0.492 ± 0.027   0.439 ± 0.021   0.434 ± 0.017       RealMLP      0.906 ± 0.015   0.907 ± 0.014   0.911 ± 0.014
TabM          0.432 ± 0.017   0.431 ± 0.017   0.430 ± 0.016       TabM         0.901 ± 0.016   0.916 ± 0.013   0.916 ± 0.014
MNCA          0.465 ± 0.019   0.455 ± 0.020   0.451 ± 0.018       MNCA         0.909 ± 0.016   0.912 ± 0.016   0.909 ± 0.015
TabPFNv2      0.468 ± 0.043   0.440 ± 0.022   0.433 ± 0.022       TabPFNv2     0.915 ± 0.015   0.915 ± 0.013   0.919 ± 0.013
TabDPT        0.481 ± 0.021   -               -                   TabDPT       0.896 ± 0.016   -               -
TabICL        0.465 ± 0.022   -               -                   TabICL       0.911 ± 0.013   -               -
Linear        0.589 ± 0.035   0.469 ± 0.021   0.468 ± 0.021       Linear       0.906 ± 0.013   0.905 ± 0.013   0.905 ± 0.013
KNN           1.477 ± 0.096   0.657 ± 0.025   0.583 ± 0.019       KNN          0.834 ± 0.018   0.854 ± 0.018   0.875 ± 0.014
AutoGluon     -               -               0.445 ± 0.018       AutoGluon    -               -               0.915 ± 0.013


               NATICUSdroid (AUC ↑)                                             QSAR-TID-11 (rmse ↓)

              Default         Tuned           Tuned + Ens.                     Default         Tuned           Tuned + Ens.
RF            0.977 ± 0.002   0.981 ± 0.003   0.981 ± 0.003       RF           0.806 ± 0.047   0.805 ± 0.048   0.796 ± 0.046
ExtraTrees    0.977 ± 0.002   0.982 ± 0.002   0.982 ± 0.002       ExtraTrees   0.806 ± 0.046   0.802 ± 0.046   0.791 ± 0.046
XGBoost       0.985 ± 0.002   0.985 ± 0.002   0.985 ± 0.002       XGBoost      0.786 ± 0.049   0.761 ± 0.047   0.760 ± 0.048
LightGBM      0.985 ± 0.002   0.986 ± 0.002   0.986 ± 0.002       LightGBM     0.772 ± 0.050   0.758 ± 0.049   0.756 ± 0.048
CatBoost      0.986 ± 0.002   0.986 ± 0.002   0.986 ± 0.002       CatBoost     0.774 ± 0.049   0.773 ± 0.048   0.771 ± 0.049
EBM           0.984 ± 0.002   0.985 ± 0.001   0.985 ± 0.001       EBM          0.872 ± 0.039   0.859 ± 0.042   0.853 ± 0.042
FastAIMLP     0.985 ± 0.002   0.985 ± 0.001   0.986 ± 0.001       FastAIMLP    0.776 ± 0.045   0.766 ± 0.049   0.761 ± 0.050
TorchMLP      0.985 ± 0.002   0.985 ± 0.001   0.986 ± 0.002       TorchMLP     0.774 ± 0.052   0.762 ± 0.049   0.748 ± 0.054
RealMLP       0.985 ± 0.002   0.986 ± 0.001   0.986 ± 0.001       RealMLP      0.763 ± 0.047   0.764 ± 0.049   0.754 ± 0.050
TabM          0.986 ± 0.001   0.986 ± 0.001   0.986 ± 0.001       TabM         0.761 ± 0.050   0.758 ± 0.050   0.755 ± 0.049
MNCA          0.983 ± 0.002   0.984 ± 0.002   0.985 ± 0.002       MNCA         0.771 ± 0.045   0.744 ± 0.044   0.734 ± 0.043
TabPFNv2      0.983 ± 0.002   0.984 ± 0.003   0.985 ± 0.002       TabPFNv2     -               -               -
TabDPT        0.985 ± 0.002   -               -                   TabDPT       0.773 ± 0.046   -               -
TabICL        0.987 ± 0.001   -               -                   TabICL       -               -               -
Linear        0.981 ± 0.002   0.981 ± 0.002   0.981 ± 0.002       Linear       1.020 ± 0.032   0.940 ± 0.040   0.938 ± 0.039
KNN           0.948 ± 0.004   0.978 ± 0.003   0.980 ± 0.003       KNN          1.003 ± 0.043   0.888 ± 0.046   0.859 ± 0.047
AutoGluon     -               -               0.987 ± 0.002       AutoGluon    -               -               0.747 ± 0.049


             QSAR_fish_toxicity (rmse ↓)                                           SDSS17 (logloss ↓)

              Default         Tuned           Tuned + Ens.                     Default         Tuned           Tuned + Ens.
RF            0.907 ± 0.047   0.885 ± 0.050   0.884 ± 0.049       RF           0.085 ± 0.002   0.073 ± 0.002   0.072 ± 0.002
ExtraTrees    0.880 ± 0.052   0.873 ± 0.055   0.870 ± 0.052       ExtraTrees   0.131 ± 0.002   0.080 ± 0.002   0.078 ± 0.002
XGBoost       0.905 ± 0.050   0.881 ± 0.043   0.879 ± 0.042       XGBoost      0.074 ± 0.002   0.074 ± 0.002   0.074 ± 0.002
LightGBM      0.894 ± 0.043   0.889 ± 0.045   0.883 ± 0.044       LightGBM     0.087 ± 0.002   0.073 ± 0.003   0.073 ± 0.002
CatBoost      0.877 ± 0.049   0.875 ± 0.045   0.874 ± 0.047       CatBoost     0.075 ± 0.002   0.074 ± 0.003   0.074 ± 0.003
EBM           0.905 ± 0.050   0.904 ± 0.048   0.898 ± 0.047       EBM          0.087 ± 0.002   0.081 ± 0.002   0.081 ± 0.002
FastAIMLP     0.908 ± 0.048   0.909 ± 0.046   0.897 ± 0.048       FastAIMLP    0.134 ± 0.004   0.111 ± 0.004   0.112 ± 0.003
TorchMLP      0.906 ± 0.055   0.897 ± 0.055   0.890 ± 0.055       TorchMLP     0.094 ± 0.003   0.081 ± 0.002   0.080 ± 0.002
RealMLP       0.878 ± 0.054   0.884 ± 0.058   0.865 ± 0.052       RealMLP      0.103 ± 0.002   0.089 ± 0.002   0.087 ± 0.002
TabM          0.910 ± 0.047   0.898 ± 0.051   0.887 ± 0.048       TabM         0.097 ± 0.002   0.083 ± 0.002   0.083 ± 0.002
MNCA          0.882 ± 0.053   0.882 ± 0.053   0.873 ± 0.053       MNCA         0.082 ± 0.002   0.076 ± 0.002   0.075 ± 0.002
TabPFNv2      0.868 ± 0.047   0.873 ± 0.051   0.860 ± 0.049       TabPFNv2     -               -               -
TabDPT        0.859 ± 0.049   -               -                   TabDPT       0.088 ± 0.001   -               -
TabICL        -               -               -                   TabICL       0.076 ± 0.002   -               -
Linear        0.950 ± 0.056   0.949 ± 0.056   0.950 ± 0.056       Linear       0.146 ± 0.003   0.145 ± 0.002   0.135 ± 0.002
KNN           0.896 ± 0.057   0.890 ± 0.052   0.880 ± 0.054       KNN          0.380 ± 0.030   0.224 ± 0.003   0.153 ± 0.003
AutoGluon     -               -               0.880 ± 0.054       AutoGluon    -               -               0.067 ± 0.002




                                                             60
             airfoil_self_noise (rmse ↓)                                            anneal (logloss ↓)

             Default          Tuned           Tuned + Ens.                     Default         Tuned           Tuned + Ens.
RF           1.898 ± 0.095    1.891 ± 0.101   1.851 ± 0.096       RF           0.046 ± 0.010   0.028 ± 0.025   0.023 ± 0.013
ExtraTrees   1.822 ± 0.094    1.676 ± 0.106   1.683 ± 0.105       ExtraTrees   0.064 ± 0.012   0.028 ± 0.022   0.026 ± 0.022
XGBoost      1.549 ± 0.104    1.439 ± 0.104   1.443 ± 0.104       XGBoost      0.039 ± 0.025   0.031 ± 0.025   0.031 ± 0.025
LightGBM     1.554 ± 0.093    1.480 ± 0.108   1.451 ± 0.108       LightGBM     0.055 ± 0.026   0.033 ± 0.019   0.034 ± 0.019
CatBoost     1.583 ± 0.096    1.327 ± 0.101   1.330 ± 0.105       CatBoost     0.040 ± 0.022   0.022 ± 0.021   0.021 ± 0.021
EBM          2.010 ± 0.117    1.955 ± 0.104   1.935 ± 0.113       EBM          0.043 ± 0.025   0.036 ± 0.033   0.034 ± 0.032
FastAIMLP    2.327 ± 0.141    1.624 ± 0.100   1.646 ± 0.105       FastAIMLP    0.085 ± 0.029   0.056 ± 0.022   0.054 ± 0.021
TorchMLP     1.493 ± 0.113    1.372 ± 0.105   1.374 ± 0.098       TorchMLP     0.040 ± 0.034   0.052 ± 0.044   0.040 ± 0.038
RealMLP      1.179 ± 0.085    1.146 ± 0.078   1.109 ± 0.081       RealMLP      0.039 ± 0.031   0.029 ± 0.032   0.024 ± 0.026
TabM         1.249 ± 0.099    1.149 ± 0.092   1.140 ± 0.088       TabM         0.036 ± 0.026   0.029 ± 0.027   0.028 ± 0.025
MNCA         1.539 ± 0.095    1.523 ± 0.137   1.452 ± 0.099       MNCA         0.043 ± 0.031   0.032 ± 0.038   0.033 ± 0.039
TabPFNv2     1.119 ± 0.088    1.112 ± 0.102   1.074 ± 0.094       TabPFNv2     0.016 ± 0.014   0.023 ± 0.019   0.019 ± 0.014
TabDPT       1.203 ± 0.084    -               -                   TabDPT       0.058 ± 0.022   -               -
TabICL       -                -               -                   TabICL       0.028 ± 0.014   -               -
Linear       5.344 ± 0.199    4.752 ± 0.141   4.732 ± 0.144       Linear       0.090 ± 0.028   0.046 ± 0.032   0.037 ± 0.024
KNN          3.369 ± 0.113    2.599 ± 0.154   2.221 ± 0.122       KNN          0.151 ± 0.043   0.080 ± 0.046   0.062 ± 0.040
AutoGluon    -                -               1.269 ± 0.090       AutoGluon    -               -               0.037 ± 0.059


              bank-marketing (AUC ↑)                                  blood-transfusion-service-center (AUC ↑)

             Default          Tuned           Tuned + Ens.                     Default         Tuned           Tuned + Ens.
RF           0.726 ± 0.006    0.761 ± 0.005   0.761 ± 0.005       RF           0.682 ± 0.026   0.714 ± 0.029   0.713 ± 0.029
ExtraTrees   0.721 ± 0.004    0.758 ± 0.005   0.758 ± 0.005       ExtraTrees   0.689 ± 0.025   0.728 ± 0.033   0.727 ± 0.031
XGBoost      0.763 ± 0.005    0.765 ± 0.006   0.765 ± 0.005       XGBoost      0.708 ± 0.030   0.733 ± 0.031   0.731 ± 0.031
LightGBM     0.763 ± 0.005    0.765 ± 0.005   0.766 ± 0.005       LightGBM     0.726 ± 0.033   0.743 ± 0.033   0.743 ± 0.031
CatBoost     0.766 ± 0.005    0.766 ± 0.005   0.765 ± 0.005       CatBoost     0.738 ± 0.029   0.737 ± 0.031   0.736 ± 0.031
EBM          0.762 ± 0.005    0.763 ± 0.005   0.763 ± 0.005       EBM          0.742 ± 0.032   0.743 ± 0.033   0.743 ± 0.033
FastAIMLP    0.759 ± 0.005    0.760 ± 0.006   0.761 ± 0.005       FastAIMLP    0.743 ± 0.030   0.754 ± 0.030   0.756 ± 0.030
TorchMLP     0.757 ± 0.006    0.758 ± 0.006   0.759 ± 0.006       TorchMLP     0.749 ± 0.032   0.747 ± 0.030   0.748 ± 0.030
RealMLP      0.761 ± 0.005    0.763 ± 0.005   0.765 ± 0.005       RealMLP      0.750 ± 0.030   0.737 ± 0.029   0.742 ± 0.027
TabM         0.764 ± 0.006    0.764 ± 0.005   0.765 ± 0.005       TabM         0.741 ± 0.029   0.737 ± 0.031   0.741 ± 0.029
MNCA         0.762 ± 0.005    0.764 ± 0.006   0.764 ± 0.005       MNCA         0.756 ± 0.030   0.737 ± 0.032   0.715 ± 0.030
TabPFNv2     -                -               -                   TabPFNv2     0.755 ± 0.029   0.748 ± 0.034   0.746 ± 0.030
TabDPT       0.761 ± 0.005    -               -                   TabDPT       0.751 ± 0.030   -               -
TabICL       0.764 ± 0.005    -               -                   TabICL       0.737 ± 0.031   -               -
Linear       0.748 ± 0.004    0.748 ± 0.004   0.748 ± 0.004       Linear       0.731 ± 0.032   0.749 ± 0.029   0.754 ± 0.026
KNN          0.712 ± 0.005    0.749 ± 0.006   0.756 ± 0.005       KNN          0.688 ± 0.023   0.727 ± 0.033   0.736 ± 0.034
AutoGluon    -                -               0.765 ± 0.006       AutoGluon    -               -               0.748 ± 0.032


                       churn (AUC ↑)                                    coil2000_insurance_policies (AUC ↑)

             Default          Tuned           Tuned + Ens.                     Default         Tuned           Tuned + Ens.
RF           0.915 ± 0.009    0.913 ± 0.012   0.913 ± 0.011       RF           0.697 ± 0.014   0.741 ± 0.017   0.742 ± 0.016
ExtraTrees   0.917 ± 0.011    0.919 ± 0.011   0.921 ± 0.011       ExtraTrees   0.696 ± 0.016   0.744 ± 0.016   0.748 ± 0.017
XGBoost      0.923 ± 0.009    0.921 ± 0.011   0.920 ± 0.011       XGBoost      0.757 ± 0.015   0.757 ± 0.016   0.758 ± 0.014
LightGBM     0.916 ± 0.011    0.920 ± 0.011   0.920 ± 0.011       LightGBM     0.752 ± 0.014   0.759 ± 0.015   0.761 ± 0.015
CatBoost     0.924 ± 0.011    0.920 ± 0.012   0.922 ± 0.011       CatBoost     0.757 ± 0.014   0.758 ± 0.013   0.759 ± 0.012
EBM          0.922 ± 0.014    0.924 ± 0.011   0.924 ± 0.011       EBM          0.754 ± 0.014   0.757 ± 0.013   0.761 ± 0.013
FastAIMLP    0.918 ± 0.011    0.921 ± 0.009   0.921 ± 0.010       FastAIMLP    0.719 ± 0.010   0.749 ± 0.013   0.747 ± 0.013
TorchMLP     0.888 ± 0.009    0.918 ± 0.010   0.918 ± 0.011       TorchMLP     0.740 ± 0.011   0.747 ± 0.015   0.752 ± 0.014
RealMLP      0.920 ± 0.010    0.924 ± 0.012   0.927 ± 0.011       RealMLP      0.742 ± 0.012   0.755 ± 0.011   0.763 ± 0.013
TabM         0.925 ± 0.011    0.923 ± 0.010   0.923 ± 0.010       TabM         0.761 ± 0.012   0.763 ± 0.012   0.766 ± 0.012
MNCA         0.903 ± 0.013    0.932 ± 0.013   0.931 ± 0.013       MNCA         0.753 ± 0.013   0.757 ± 0.015   0.767 ± 0.012
TabPFNv2     0.928 ± 0.011    0.925 ± 0.008   0.924 ± 0.010       TabPFNv2     0.753 ± 0.015   0.773 ± 0.015   0.773 ± 0.014
TabDPT       0.923 ± 0.009    -               -                   TabDPT       0.725 ± 0.010   -               -
TabICL       0.924 ± 0.011    -               -                   TabICL       0.756 ± 0.012   -               -
Linear       0.777 ± 0.018    0.825 ± 0.008   0.825 ± 0.008       Linear       0.737 ± 0.012   0.739 ± 0.011   0.740 ± 0.012
KNN          0.866 ± 0.004    0.892 ± 0.010   0.899 ± 0.010       KNN          0.657 ± 0.020   0.718 ± 0.015   0.732 ± 0.014
AutoGluon    -                -               0.922 ± 0.011       AutoGluon    -               -               0.759 ± 0.016




                                                             61
    concrete_compressive_strength (rmse ↓)                                          credit-g (AUC ↑)

             Default         Tuned           Tuned + Ens.                     Default          Tuned            Tuned + Ens.
RF           5.261 ± 0.336   5.189 ± 0.366   5.106 ± 0.352       RF           0.783 ± 0.017    0.781 ± 0.019    0.782 ± 0.019
ExtraTrees   5.139 ± 0.341   5.073 ± 0.333   5.048 ± 0.348       ExtraTrees   0.779 ± 0.019    0.781 ± 0.018    0.782 ± 0.018
XGBoost      4.755 ± 0.387   4.236 ± 0.373   4.222 ± 0.384       XGBoost      0.783 ± 0.021    0.792 ± 0.021    0.793 ± 0.021
LightGBM     4.484 ± 0.388   4.235 ± 0.395   4.212 ± 0.396       LightGBM     0.771 ± 0.019    0.792 ± 0.020    0.796 ± 0.020
CatBoost     4.214 ± 0.413   4.231 ± 0.415   4.209 ± 0.411       CatBoost     0.789 ± 0.017    0.795 ± 0.020    0.795 ± 0.017
EBM          4.442 ± 0.295   4.429 ± 0.331   4.371 ± 0.308       EBM          0.790 ± 0.021    0.782 ± 0.025    0.787 ± 0.023
FastAIMLP    6.369 ± 0.379   5.187 ± 0.355   5.272 ± 0.360       FastAIMLP    0.783 ± 0.029    0.784 ± 0.025    0.793 ± 0.023
TorchMLP     4.817 ± 0.354   4.715 ± 0.350   4.654 ± 0.334       TorchMLP     0.772 ± 0.017    0.782 ± 0.020    0.788 ± 0.020
RealMLP      4.688 ± 0.364   4.344 ± 0.289   4.133 ± 0.329       RealMLP      0.785 ± 0.022    0.784 ± 0.023    0.791 ± 0.020
TabM         4.271 ± 0.385   4.269 ± 0.496   4.146 ± 0.409       TabM         0.793 ± 0.022    0.790 ± 0.020    0.795 ± 0.020
MNCA         4.940 ± 0.309   4.749 ± 0.424   4.487 ± 0.388       MNCA         0.783 ± 0.020    0.783 ± 0.020    0.775 ± 0.021
TabPFNv2     4.259 ± 0.379   4.171 ± 0.439   4.118 ± 0.409       TabPFNv2     0.776 ± 0.019    0.773 ± 0.020    0.792 ± 0.020
TabDPT       4.267 ± 0.422   -               -                   TabDPT       0.780 ± 0.019    -                -
TabICL       -               -               -                   TabICL       0.790 ± 0.017    -                -
Linear       8.228 ± 0.359   8.160 ± 0.362   8.153 ± 0.354       Linear       0.781 ± 0.021    0.787 ± 0.021    0.787 ± 0.021
KNN          8.972 ± 0.464   6.762 ± 0.565   6.548 ± 0.555       KNN          0.756 ± 0.031    0.778 ± 0.022    0.784 ± 0.022
AutoGluon    -               -               4.165 ± 0.389       AutoGluon    -                -                0.794 ± 0.020


       credit_card_clients_default (AUC ↑)                           customer_satisfaction_in_airline (AUC ↑)

             Default         Tuned           Tuned + Ens.                     Default          Tuned            Tuned + Ens.
RF           0.765 ± 0.005   0.780 ± 0.004   0.780 ± 0.004       RF           0.993 ± 0.000    0.993 ± 0.000    0.993 ± 0.000
ExtraTrees   0.766 ± 0.004   0.781 ± 0.004   0.782 ± 0.004       ExtraTrees   0.992 ± 0.000    0.994 ± 0.000    0.994 ± 0.000
XGBoost      0.783 ± 0.004   0.785 ± 0.004   0.785 ± 0.004       XGBoost      0.994 ± 0.000    0.994 ± 0.000    0.994 ± 0.000
LightGBM     0.784 ± 0.004   0.785 ± 0.004   0.785 ± 0.004       LightGBM     0.994 ± 0.000    0.995 ± 0.000    0.995 ± 0.000
CatBoost     0.784 ± 0.004   0.785 ± 0.004   0.785 ± 0.004       CatBoost     0.995 ± 0.000    0.995 ± 0.000    0.995 ± 0.000
EBM          0.783 ± 0.004   0.783 ± 0.004   0.784 ± 0.004       EBM          0.985 ± 0.000    0.986 ± 0.001    0.986 ± 0.001
FastAIMLP    0.781 ± 0.005   0.783 ± 0.005   0.783 ± 0.005       FastAIMLP    0.995 ± 0.000    0.995 ± 0.000    0.995 ± 0.000
TorchMLP     0.779 ± 0.003   0.783 ± 0.003   0.785 ± 0.003       TorchMLP     0.993 ± 0.000    0.995 ± 0.000    0.995 ± 0.000
RealMLP      0.785 ± 0.004   0.785 ± 0.005   0.786 ± 0.004       RealMLP      0.995 ± 0.000    0.995 ± 0.000    0.995 ± 0.000
TabM         0.784 ± 0.004   0.788 ± 0.004   0.788 ± 0.004       TabM         0.995 ± 0.000    0.995 ± 0.000    0.995 ± 0.000
MNCA         0.781 ± 0.004   0.787 ± 0.003   0.787 ± 0.004       MNCA         0.993 ± 0.000    0.995 ± 0.000    0.995 ± 0.000
TabPFNv2     -               -               -                   TabPFNv2     -                -                -
TabDPT       0.780 ± 0.004   -               -                   TabDPT       0.994 ± 0.000    -                -
TabICL       0.788 ± 0.004   -               -                   TabICL       0.995 ± 0.000    -                -
Linear       0.745 ± 0.004   0.745 ± 0.004   0.745 ± 0.004       Linear       0.964 ± 0.001    0.964 ± 0.001    0.965 ± 0.001
KNN          0.736 ± 0.004   0.758 ± 0.004   0.769 ± 0.004       KNN          0.985 ± 0.000    0.985 ± 0.000    0.988 ± 0.000
AutoGluon    -               -               0.787 ± 0.004       AutoGluon    -                -                0.996 ± 0.000


                  diabetes (AUC ↑)                                                 diamonds (rmse ↓)

             Default         Tuned           Tuned + Ens.                     Default           Tuned            Tuned + Ens.
RF           0.825 ± 0.023   0.830 ± 0.025   0.830 ± 0.024       RF           549.9 ± 8.3       549.9 ± 8.3      547.2 ± 9.3
ExtraTrees   0.826 ± 0.022   0.837 ± 0.021   0.837 ± 0.021       ExtraTrees   536.6 ± 8.7       536.3 ± 9.1      534.6 ± 8.9
XGBoost      0.824 ± 0.024   0.830 ± 0.024   0.832 ± 0.024       XGBoost      539.0 ± 10.0      530.1 ± 10.0     528.2 ± 10.9
LightGBM     0.829 ± 0.025   0.838 ± 0.026   0.837 ± 0.025       LightGBM     532.1 ± 9.1       524.9 ± 9.7      519.0 ± 9.4
CatBoost     0.833 ± 0.025   0.834 ± 0.025   0.835 ± 0.024       CatBoost     520.7 ± 12.0      520.7 ± 12.0     520.8 ± 11.8
EBM          0.840 ± 0.025   0.839 ± 0.023   0.840 ± 0.023       EBM          618.2 ± 14.5      613.7 ± 11.9     612.4 ± 13.9
FastAIMLP    0.826 ± 0.024   0.832 ± 0.023   0.835 ± 0.023       FastAIMLP    563.1 ± 15.0      559.4 ± 9.4      550.0 ± 8.9
TorchMLP     0.821 ± 0.024   0.825 ± 0.026   0.827 ± 0.025       TorchMLP     627.3 ± 25.8      550.5 ± 16.6     542.6 ± 15.2
RealMLP      0.833 ± 0.023   0.832 ± 0.022   0.836 ± 0.024       RealMLP      529.6 ± 8.1       521.5 ± 7.6      513.7 ± 7.3
TabM         0.832 ± 0.024   0.830 ± 0.024   0.834 ± 0.024       TabM         522.5 ± 8.9       521.5 ± 8.1      518.9 ± 8.8
MNCA         0.839 ± 0.024   0.834 ± 0.024   0.813 ± 0.022       MNCA         524.7 ± 8.7       521.1 ± 7.5      510.3 ± 8.1
TabPFNv2     0.844 ± 0.023   0.842 ± 0.024   0.839 ± 0.024       TabPFNv2     -                 -                -
TabDPT       0.840 ± 0.023   -               -                   TabDPT       535.4 ± 13.1      -                -
TabICL       0.837 ± 0.023   -               -                   TabICL       -                 -                -
Linear       0.832 ± 0.024   0.830 ± 0.023   0.831 ± 0.023       Linear       1652.8 ± 179.7    1139.6 ± 27.1    1140.3 ± 28.0
KNN          0.811 ± 0.023   0.823 ± 0.025   0.823 ± 0.025       KNN          957.3 ± 22.1      706.9 ± 15.5     668.3 ± 14.2
AutoGluon    -               -               0.835 ± 0.023       AutoGluon    -                 -                510.5 ± 9.5




                                                            62
hazelnut-spread-contaminant-detection (AUC ↑)                          healthcare_insurance_expenses (rmse ↓)

             Default          Tuned           Tuned + Ens.                     Default           Tuned              Tuned + Ens.
RF           0.958 ± 0.006    0.959 ± 0.006   0.960 ± 0.006       RF           4888.5 ± 289.2    4641.1 ± 303.6     4629.6 ± 302.9
ExtraTrees   0.955 ± 0.006    0.964 ± 0.005   0.964 ± 0.005       ExtraTrees   4844.9 ± 274.8    4607.0 ± 324.0     4609.9 ± 323.0
XGBoost      0.973 ± 0.005    0.975 ± 0.004   0.975 ± 0.004       XGBoost      4672.0 ± 306.3    4523.3 ± 319.7     4519.6 ± 320.2
LightGBM     0.973 ± 0.005    0.978 ± 0.004   0.978 ± 0.004       LightGBM     4610.4 ± 313.8    4525.1 ± 329.2     4511.9 ± 325.5
CatBoost     0.974 ± 0.004    0.975 ± 0.004   0.974 ± 0.004       CatBoost     4535.4 ± 328.8    4518.2 ± 321.8     4519.2 ± 321.1
EBM          0.971 ± 0.005    0.975 ± 0.004   0.976 ± 0.004       EBM          4549.2 ± 318.8    4499.7 ± 333.4     4499.3 ± 325.7
FastAIMLP    0.983 ± 0.003    0.986 ± 0.003   0.986 ± 0.003       FastAIMLP    4720.2 ± 313.1    4633.9 ± 317.7     4624.2 ± 311.0
TorchMLP     0.983 ± 0.003    0.987 ± 0.003   0.987 ± 0.003       TorchMLP     4661.1 ± 342.8    4526.1 ± 328.6     4534.0 ± 333.3
RealMLP      0.984 ± 0.003    0.986 ± 0.003   0.986 ± 0.003       RealMLP      4579.2 ± 313.2    4570.6 ± 323.5     4534.8 ± 323.1
TabM         0.967 ± 0.005    0.984 ± 0.003   0.985 ± 0.003       TabM         4513.7 ± 323.4    4530.0 ± 323.1     4510.9 ± 325.7
MNCA         0.986 ± 0.003    0.988 ± 0.003   0.988 ± 0.003       MNCA         4605.4 ± 332.0    4614.4 ± 330.3     4589.2 ± 331.3
TabPFNv2     0.988 ± 0.003    0.989 ± 0.003   0.989 ± 0.003       TabPFNv2     4694.7 ± 302.6    4650.3 ± 336.9     4567.7 ± 318.7
TabDPT       0.992 ± 0.002    -               -                   TabDPT       4508.4 ± 295.4    -                  -
TabICL       0.992 ± 0.002    -               -                   TabICL       -                 -                  -
Linear       0.948 ± 0.006    0.952 ± 0.006   0.953 ± 0.006       Linear       6083.4 ± 275.9    6085.5 ± 275.8     6084.5 ± 276.6
KNN          0.914 ± 0.009    0.934 ± 0.009   0.943 ± 0.008       KNN          5797.5 ± 392.9    5058.7 ± 315.5     5024.4 ± 319.8
AutoGluon    -                -               0.987 ± 0.003       AutoGluon    -                 -                  4490.4 ± 331.9


                       heloc (AUC ↑)                                            hiva_agnostic (logloss ↓)

             Default          Tuned           Tuned + Ens.                     Default          Tuned             Tuned + Ens.
RF           0.791 ± 0.005    0.792 ± 0.006   0.793 ± 0.005       RF           0.263 ± 0.025    0.174 ± 0.001     0.174 ± 0.001
ExtraTrees   0.790 ± 0.005    0.793 ± 0.005   0.793 ± 0.005       ExtraTrees   0.268 ± 0.027    0.174 ± 0.000     0.174 ± 0.000
XGBoost      0.794 ± 0.005    0.797 ± 0.005   0.797 ± 0.005       XGBoost      0.182 ± 0.002    0.179 ± 0.002     0.179 ± 0.002
LightGBM     0.794 ± 0.005    0.799 ± 0.005   0.799 ± 0.005       LightGBM     0.175 ± 0.001    0.175 ± 0.001     0.175 ± 0.001
CatBoost     0.798 ± 0.004    0.798 ± 0.005   0.798 ± 0.004       CatBoost     0.176 ± 0.001    0.177 ± 0.002     0.177 ± 0.002
EBM          0.799 ± 0.005    0.799 ± 0.005   0.799 ± 0.005       EBM          0.174 ± 0.001    0.176 ± 0.001     0.175 ± 0.001
FastAIMLP    0.791 ± 0.004    0.794 ± 0.005   0.795 ± 0.005       FastAIMLP    0.213 ± 0.010    0.183 ± 0.008     0.183 ± 0.004
TorchMLP     0.791 ± 0.004    0.795 ± 0.004   0.796 ± 0.004       TorchMLP     0.183 ± 0.005    0.176 ± 0.001     0.178 ± 0.003
RealMLP      0.798 ± 0.004    0.798 ± 0.004   0.800 ± 0.004       RealMLP      0.196 ± 0.007    0.176 ± 0.002     0.179 ± 0.002
TabM         0.797 ± 0.004    0.799 ± 0.004   0.799 ± 0.004       TabM         0.177 ± 0.001    0.175 ± 0.001     0.175 ± 0.001
MNCA         0.799 ± 0.004    0.801 ± 0.005   0.799 ± 0.005       MNCA         0.224 ± 0.012    0.176 ± 0.002     0.179 ± 0.002
TabPFNv2     0.801 ± 0.003    0.801 ± 0.004   0.801 ± 0.003       TabPFNv2     -                -                 -
TabDPT       0.794 ± 0.004    -               -                   TabDPT       0.181 ± 0.004    -                 -
TabICL       0.800 ± 0.004    -               -                   TabICL       -                -                 -
Linear       0.786 ± 0.005    0.786 ± 0.005   0.786 ± 0.005       Linear       0.448 ± 0.024    0.335 ± 0.019     0.335 ± 0.019
KNN          0.743 ± 0.004    0.788 ± 0.005   0.788 ± 0.004       KNN          0.468 ± 0.017    0.176 ± 0.003     0.176 ± 0.003
AutoGluon    -                -               0.798 ± 0.005       AutoGluon    -                -                 0.193 ± 0.027


                   houses (rmse ↓)                                 in_vehicle_coupon_recommendation (AUC ↑)

             Default          Tuned           Tuned + Ens.                     Default          Tuned             Tuned + Ens.
RF           0.231 ± 0.002    0.231 ± 0.002   0.230 ± 0.002       RF           0.812 ± 0.007    0.817 ± 0.008     0.822 ± 0.008
ExtraTrees   0.243 ± 0.002    0.238 ± 0.002   0.238 ± 0.002       ExtraTrees   0.798 ± 0.007    0.804 ± 0.008     0.811 ± 0.008
XGBoost      0.215 ± 0.003    0.215 ± 0.002   0.215 ± 0.002       XGBoost      0.832 ± 0.004    0.842 ± 0.005     0.843 ± 0.005
LightGBM     0.217 ± 0.002    0.212 ± 0.002   0.211 ± 0.002       LightGBM     0.836 ± 0.005    0.844 ± 0.005     0.845 ± 0.005
CatBoost     0.211 ± 0.002    0.211 ± 0.002   0.211 ± 0.002       CatBoost     0.840 ± 0.006    0.843 ± 0.005     0.844 ± 0.006
EBM          0.231 ± 0.003    0.229 ± 0.003   0.228 ± 0.003       EBM          0.802 ± 0.006    0.807 ± 0.006     0.807 ± 0.006
FastAIMLP    0.244 ± 0.001    0.236 ± 0.002   0.235 ± 0.001       FastAIMLP    0.810 ± 0.007    0.823 ± 0.007     0.826 ± 0.006
TorchMLP     0.233 ± 0.003    0.228 ± 0.003   0.226 ± 0.002       TorchMLP     0.825 ± 0.004    0.833 ± 0.008     0.841 ± 0.006
RealMLP      0.223 ± 0.002    0.211 ± 0.003   0.203 ± 0.003       RealMLP      0.837 ± 0.006    0.839 ± 0.006     0.849 ± 0.006
TabM         0.212 ± 0.002    0.208 ± 0.002   0.205 ± 0.002       TabM         0.848 ± 0.005    0.851 ± 0.006     0.852 ± 0.006
MNCA         0.204 ± 0.003    0.203 ± 0.003   0.199 ± 0.002       MNCA         0.812 ± 0.006    0.842 ± 0.006     0.849 ± 0.006
TabPFNv2     -                -               -                   TabPFNv2     0.789 ± 0.008    0.806 ± 0.008     0.837 ± 0.007
TabDPT       0.209 ± 0.003    -               -                   TabDPT       0.798 ± 0.005    -                 -
TabICL       -                -               -                   TabICL       0.846 ± 0.006    -                 -
Linear       0.325 ± 0.003    0.325 ± 0.003   0.323 ± 0.003       Linear       0.735 ± 0.007    0.735 ± 0.007     0.735 ± 0.007
KNN          0.290 ± 0.002    0.282 ± 0.002   0.273 ± 0.002       KNN          0.728 ± 0.009    0.778 ± 0.007     0.807 ± 0.006
AutoGluon    -                -               0.204 ± 0.002       AutoGluon    -                -                 0.847 ± 0.006




                                                             63
                       jm1 (AUC ↑)                                            kddcup09_appetency (AUC ↑)

             Default         Tuned           Tuned + Ens.                      Default          Tuned             Tuned + Ens.
RF           0.752 ± 0.008   0.752 ± 0.008   0.761 ± 0.007       RF            0.772 ± 0.016    0.822 ± 0.011     0.821 ± 0.010
ExtraTrees   0.756 ± 0.007   0.758 ± 0.008   0.765 ± 0.006       ExtraTrees    0.771 ± 0.012    0.819 ± 0.012     0.821 ± 0.009
XGBoost      0.748 ± 0.007   0.749 ± 0.007   0.752 ± 0.006       XGBoost       0.830 ± 0.012    0.833 ± 0.009     0.837 ± 0.010
LightGBM     0.748 ± 0.006   0.751 ± 0.006   0.753 ± 0.006       LightGBM      0.798 ± 0.009    0.821 ± 0.009     0.829 ± 0.010
CatBoost     0.744 ± 0.005   0.751 ± 0.005   0.749 ± 0.005       CatBoost      0.846 ± 0.008    0.845 ± 0.008     0.845 ± 0.008
EBM          0.735 ± 0.006   0.734 ± 0.007   0.736 ± 0.007       EBM           0.826 ± 0.009    0.831 ± 0.010     0.833 ± 0.010
FastAIMLP    0.728 ± 0.007   0.728 ± 0.007   0.733 ± 0.006       FastAIMLP     0.749 ± 0.023    0.795 ± 0.013     0.804 ± 0.014
TorchMLP     0.728 ± 0.005   0.734 ± 0.005   0.736 ± 0.005       TorchMLP      0.819 ± 0.012    0.826 ± 0.012     0.831 ± 0.013
RealMLP      0.731 ± 0.007   0.735 ± 0.007   0.749 ± 0.007       RealMLP       0.820 ± 0.011    0.822 ± 0.011     0.832 ± 0.011
TabM         0.733 ± 0.007   0.738 ± 0.004   0.746 ± 0.006       TabM          0.806 ± 0.011    0.821 ± 0.010     0.821 ± 0.010
MNCA         0.762 ± 0.003   0.761 ± 0.006   0.769 ± 0.006       MNCA          0.797 ± 0.010    0.814 ± 0.012     0.803 ± 0.015
TabPFNv2     0.732 ± 0.008   0.755 ± 0.007   0.773 ± 0.006       TabPFNv2      -                -                 -
TabDPT       0.771 ± 0.005   -               -                   TabDPT        0.742 ± 0.009    -                 -
TabICL       0.776 ± 0.005   -               -                   TabICL        0.811 ± 0.014    -                 -
Linear       0.724 ± 0.006   0.723 ± 0.006   0.724 ± 0.006       Linear        0.797 ± 0.013    0.820 ± 0.014     0.821 ± 0.014
KNN          0.740 ± 0.007   0.750 ± 0.007   0.761 ± 0.007       KNN           0.605 ± 0.010    0.760 ± 0.012     0.776 ± 0.013
AutoGluon    -               -               0.760 ± 0.007       AutoGluon     -                -                 0.846 ± 0.009


         maternal_health_risk (logloss ↓)                                       miami_housing (rmse ↓)

             Default         Tuned           Tuned + Ens.                      Default         Tuned            Tuned + Ens.
RF           0.479 ± 0.071   0.470 ± 0.053   0.448 ± 0.054       RF            9676 ± 592      9332 ± 503       9302 ± 500
ExtraTrees   0.478 ± 0.069   0.453 ± 0.055   0.443 ± 0.055       ExtraTrees    9482 ± 400      9195 ± 395       9166 ± 409
XGBoost      0.470 ± 0.051   0.459 ± 0.051   0.462 ± 0.050       XGBoost       8650 ± 447      8062 ± 361       8042 ± 357
LightGBM     0.488 ± 0.052   0.462 ± 0.049   0.461 ± 0.045       LightGBM      8563 ± 463      8124 ± 410       7961 ± 354
CatBoost     0.478 ± 0.055   0.463 ± 0.053   0.459 ± 0.049       CatBoost      7985 ± 315      7836 ± 342       7847 ± 329
EBM          0.569 ± 0.038   0.562 ± 0.042   0.557 ± 0.040       EBM           10420 ± 365     9882 ± 466       9823 ± 438
FastAIMLP    0.650 ± 0.044   0.617 ± 0.040   0.611 ± 0.039       FastAIMLP     9034 ± 512      8855 ± 535       8664 ± 483
TorchMLP     0.606 ± 0.054   0.566 ± 0.053   0.554 ± 0.046       TorchMLP      9265 ± 455      8631 ± 511       8528 ± 466
RealMLP      0.558 ± 0.056   0.463 ± 0.058   0.436 ± 0.049       RealMLP       8605 ± 402      8337 ± 457       8018 ± 399
TabM         0.513 ± 0.045   0.484 ± 0.057   0.469 ± 0.051       TabM          8307 ± 486      8115 ± 449       8023 ± 428
MNCA         0.453 ± 0.042   0.442 ± 0.047   0.428 ± 0.050       MNCA          8813 ± 434      8307 ± 380       8015 ± 409
TabPFNv2     0.451 ± 0.047   0.439 ± 0.057   0.437 ± 0.057       TabPFNv2      8579 ± 447      7829 ± 457       7711 ± 442
TabDPT       0.405 ± 0.062   -               -                   TabDPT        8213 ± 497      -                -
TabICL       0.410 ± 0.058   -               -                   TabICL        -               -                -
Linear       0.796 ± 0.037   0.793 ± 0.038   0.784 ± 0.037       Linear        19126 ± 458     17557 ± 366      17556 ± 367
KNN          0.938 ± 0.236   0.810 ± 0.126   0.464 ± 0.062       KNN           11957 ± 565     10441 ± 503      10134 ± 548
AutoGluon    -               -               0.462 ± 0.061       AutoGluon     -               -                7873 ± 429


       online_shoppers_intention (AUC ↑)                                 physiochemical_protein (rmse ↓)

             Default         Tuned           Tuned + Ens.                      Default          Tuned             Tuned + Ens.
RF           0.926 ± 0.004   0.931 ± 0.004   0.932 ± 0.003       RF            3.565 ± 0.021    3.463 ± 0.021     3.471 ± 0.021
ExtraTrees   0.918 ± 0.005   0.931 ± 0.004   0.931 ± 0.004       ExtraTrees    3.548 ± 0.022    3.466 ± 0.022     3.474 ± 0.021
XGBoost      0.935 ± 0.004   0.934 ± 0.003   0.936 ± 0.003       XGBoost       3.513 ± 0.024    3.390 ± 0.024     3.390 ± 0.024
LightGBM     0.934 ± 0.003   0.935 ± 0.004   0.935 ± 0.003       LightGBM      3.477 ± 0.026    3.381 ± 0.027     3.384 ± 0.027
CatBoost     0.934 ± 0.003   0.933 ± 0.004   0.934 ± 0.004       CatBoost      3.522 ± 0.026    3.395 ± 0.029     3.383 ± 0.027
EBM          0.931 ± 0.003   0.931 ± 0.003   0.931 ± 0.003       EBM           4.241 ± 0.020    4.234 ± 0.019     4.226 ± 0.020
FastAIMLP    0.926 ± 0.004   0.931 ± 0.005   0.932 ± 0.004       FastAIMLP     4.014 ± 0.027    3.675 ± 0.031     3.683 ± 0.034
TorchMLP     0.930 ± 0.004   0.935 ± 0.004   0.936 ± 0.003       TorchMLP      3.388 ± 0.021    3.289 ± 0.028     3.228 ± 0.018
RealMLP      0.929 ± 0.004   0.933 ± 0.003   0.934 ± 0.004       RealMLP       3.466 ± 0.042    3.284 ± 0.029     3.125 ± 0.028
TabM         0.935 ± 0.003   0.936 ± 0.003   0.936 ± 0.004       TabM          3.426 ± 0.027    3.273 ± 0.031     3.212 ± 0.032
MNCA         0.934 ± 0.003   0.935 ± 0.003   0.936 ± 0.003       MNCA          3.170 ± 0.040    3.056 ± 0.034     2.985 ± 0.038
TabPFNv2     0.934 ± 0.004   0.937 ± 0.003   0.937 ± 0.003       TabPFNv2      -                -                 -
TabDPT       0.926 ± 0.005   -               -                   TabDPT        2.912 ± 0.033    -                 -
TabICL       0.937 ± 0.003   -               -                   TabICL        -                -                 -
Linear       0.913 ± 0.007   0.913 ± 0.007   0.918 ± 0.006       Linear        5.194 ± 0.024    5.188 ± 0.022     5.142 ± 0.023
KNN          0.795 ± 0.005   0.897 ± 0.007   0.922 ± 0.004       KNN           3.909 ± 0.032    3.688 ± 0.042     3.586 ± 0.041
AutoGluon    -               -               0.936 ± 0.003       AutoGluon     -                -                 3.107 ± 0.026




                                                            64
      polish_companies_bankruptcy (AUC ↑)                                         qsar-biodeg (AUC ↑)

              Default         Tuned           Tuned + Ens.                     Default          Tuned             Tuned + Ens.
 RF           0.927 ± 0.007   0.935 ± 0.008   0.938 ± 0.007       RF           0.930 ± 0.013    0.929 ± 0.013     0.929 ± 0.013
 ExtraTrees   0.874 ± 0.013   0.891 ± 0.013   0.893 ± 0.011       ExtraTrees   0.932 ± 0.013    0.932 ± 0.013     0.934 ± 0.013
 XGBoost      0.958 ± 0.007   0.957 ± 0.007   0.957 ± 0.008       XGBoost      0.926 ± 0.013    0.931 ± 0.012     0.931 ± 0.012
 LightGBM     0.954 ± 0.007   0.955 ± 0.008   0.957 ± 0.007       LightGBM     0.927 ± 0.012    0.933 ± 0.012     0.933 ± 0.012
 CatBoost     0.961 ± 0.008   0.961 ± 0.008   0.960 ± 0.008       CatBoost     0.930 ± 0.012    0.931 ± 0.012     0.932 ± 0.011
 EBM          0.962 ± 0.009   0.962 ± 0.010   0.964 ± 0.009       EBM          0.931 ± 0.011    0.931 ± 0.011     0.933 ± 0.011
 FastAIMLP    0.841 ± 0.026   0.852 ± 0.034   0.862 ± 0.022       FastAIMLP    0.932 ± 0.013    0.932 ± 0.014     0.934 ± 0.013
 TorchMLP     0.903 ± 0.006   0.955 ± 0.006   0.957 ± 0.005       TorchMLP     0.924 ± 0.014    0.923 ± 0.014     0.927 ± 0.014
 RealMLP      0.962 ± 0.004   0.957 ± 0.006   0.963 ± 0.006       RealMLP      0.927 ± 0.013    0.926 ± 0.015     0.934 ± 0.012
 TabM         0.951 ± 0.009   0.969 ± 0.005   0.970 ± 0.004       TabM         0.931 ± 0.011    0.934 ± 0.013     0.936 ± 0.012
 MNCA         0.962 ± 0.008   0.965 ± 0.009   0.968 ± 0.006       MNCA         0.928 ± 0.012    0.928 ± 0.012     0.931 ± 0.012
 TabPFNv2     0.959 ± 0.006   0.979 ± 0.003   0.981 ± 0.002       TabPFNv2     0.936 ± 0.011    0.932 ± 0.013     0.936 ± 0.012
 TabDPT       0.958 ± 0.009   -               -                   TabDPT       0.934 ± 0.012    -                 -
 TabICL       0.974 ± 0.002   -               -                   TabICL       0.938 ± 0.012    -                 -
 Linear       0.867 ± 0.016   0.887 ± 0.011   0.896 ± 0.010       Linear       0.910 ± 0.016    0.923 ± 0.014     0.923 ± 0.014
 KNN          0.775 ± 0.029   0.840 ± 0.008   0.852 ± 0.011       KNN          0.907 ± 0.017    0.914 ± 0.015     0.923 ± 0.014
 AutoGluon    -               -               0.969 ± 0.005       AutoGluon    -                -                 0.934 ± 0.013


               seismic-bumps (AUC ↑)                                                 splice (logloss ↓)

              Default         Tuned           Tuned + Ens.                     Default          Tuned             Tuned + Ens.
 RF           0.747 ± 0.021   0.767 ± 0.022   0.765 ± 0.026       RF           0.317 ± 0.005    0.180 ± 0.015     0.178 ± 0.014
 ExtraTrees   0.734 ± 0.024   0.767 ± 0.029   0.771 ± 0.025       ExtraTrees   0.393 ± 0.007    0.175 ± 0.015     0.173 ± 0.013
 XGBoost      0.759 ± 0.022   0.768 ± 0.024   0.771 ± 0.025       XGBoost      0.119 ± 0.020    0.109 ± 0.018     0.109 ± 0.018
 LightGBM     0.752 ± 0.027   0.770 ± 0.027   0.771 ± 0.026       LightGBM     0.111 ± 0.016    0.103 ± 0.016     0.102 ± 0.015
 CatBoost     0.776 ± 0.027   0.772 ± 0.026   0.767 ± 0.028       CatBoost     0.110 ± 0.017    0.115 ± 0.020     0.111 ± 0.018
 EBM          0.770 ± 0.026   0.763 ± 0.026   0.767 ± 0.025       EBM          0.118 ± 0.013    0.119 ± 0.012     0.117 ± 0.012
 FastAIMLP    0.728 ± 0.034   0.759 ± 0.033   0.761 ± 0.028       FastAIMLP    0.118 ± 0.013    0.105 ± 0.013     0.103 ± 0.014
 TorchMLP     0.763 ± 0.026   0.758 ± 0.026   0.762 ± 0.025       TorchMLP     0.157 ± 0.022    0.127 ± 0.017     0.116 ± 0.014
 RealMLP      0.760 ± 0.030   0.761 ± 0.027   0.766 ± 0.027       RealMLP      0.126 ± 0.014    0.110 ± 0.014     0.106 ± 0.013
 TabM         0.769 ± 0.024   0.768 ± 0.026   0.770 ± 0.026       TabM         0.110 ± 0.016    0.112 ± 0.019     0.110 ± 0.017
 MNCA         0.771 ± 0.023   0.763 ± 0.027   0.734 ± 0.026       MNCA         0.144 ± 0.013    0.120 ± 0.011     0.122 ± 0.014
 TabPFNv2     0.772 ± 0.025   0.766 ± 0.023   0.769 ± 0.024       TabPFNv2     0.107 ± 0.015    0.113 ± 0.019     0.099 ± 0.015
 TabDPT       0.774 ± 0.022   -               -                   TabDPT       0.267 ± 0.010    -                 -
 TabICL       0.783 ± 0.024   -               -                   TabICL       0.148 ± 0.020    -                 -
 Linear       0.759 ± 0.024   0.761 ± 0.023   0.763 ± 0.025       Linear       0.167 ± 0.019    0.148 ± 0.012     0.148 ± 0.012
 KNN          0.685 ± 0.034   0.764 ± 0.028   0.760 ± 0.022       KNN          0.551 ± 0.017    0.485 ± 0.024     0.447 ± 0.025
 AutoGluon    -               -               0.758 ± 0.032       AutoGluon    -                -                 0.100 ± 0.017


students_dropout_and_academic_success (logloss ↓)                              superconductivity (rmse ↓)

              Default         Tuned           Tuned + Ens.                     Default         Tuned            Tuned + Ens.
 RF           0.584 ± 0.011   0.576 ± 0.014   0.574 ± 0.013       RF           9.63 ± 0.19     9.62 ± 0.19      9.53 ± 0.19
 ExtraTrees   0.591 ± 0.012   0.570 ± 0.011   0.566 ± 0.013       ExtraTrees   9.43 ± 0.18     9.43 ± 0.18      9.39 ± 0.18
 XGBoost      0.554 ± 0.016   0.545 ± 0.015   0.546 ± 0.014       XGBoost      9.45 ± 0.18     9.35 ± 0.21      9.34 ± 0.20
 LightGBM     0.555 ± 0.015   0.543 ± 0.016   0.542 ± 0.015       LightGBM     9.41 ± 0.21     9.28 ± 0.22      9.26 ± 0.20
 CatBoost     0.552 ± 0.016   0.543 ± 0.017   0.541 ± 0.016       CatBoost     9.36 ± 0.19     9.34 ± 0.21      9.34 ± 0.20
 EBM          0.565 ± 0.014   0.561 ± 0.013   0.560 ± 0.014       EBM          10.53 ± 0.23    10.43 ± 0.22     10.21 ± 0.18
 FastAIMLP    0.565 ± 0.021   0.549 ± 0.015   0.540 ± 0.015       FastAIMLP    11.51 ± 0.10    10.59 ± 0.10     10.55 ± 0.12
 TorchMLP     0.581 ± 0.018   0.559 ± 0.016   0.552 ± 0.014       TorchMLP     9.95 ± 0.21     9.66 ± 0.16      9.56 ± 0.16
 RealMLP      0.556 ± 0.015   0.553 ± 0.013   0.542 ± 0.014       RealMLP      9.57 ± 0.29     9.44 ± 0.23      9.22 ± 0.21
 TabM         0.543 ± 0.013   0.541 ± 0.014   0.538 ± 0.014       TabM         9.51 ± 0.21     9.31 ± 0.21      9.24 ± 0.20
 MNCA         0.555 ± 0.015   0.554 ± 0.012   0.546 ± 0.013       MNCA         9.56 ± 0.16     9.50 ± 0.14      9.28 ± 0.19
 TabPFNv2     0.534 ± 0.012   0.529 ± 0.015   0.527 ± 0.015       TabPFNv2     -               -                -
 TabDPT       0.561 ± 0.018   -               -                   TabDPT       9.08 ± 0.20     -                -
 TabICL       0.550 ± 0.014   -               -                   TabICL       -               -                -
 Linear       0.571 ± 0.017   0.562 ± 0.013   0.561 ± 0.013       Linear       17.43 ± 0.10    17.42 ± 0.09     17.26 ± 0.10
 KNN          0.829 ± 0.047   0.705 ± 0.018   0.663 ± 0.017       KNN          11.10 ± 0.16    10.25 ± 0.26     9.95 ± 0.22
 AutoGluon    -               -               0.536 ± 0.015       AutoGluon    -               -                9.22 ± 0.16




                                                             65
   taiwanese_bankruptcy_prediction (AUC ↑)                                   website_phishing (logloss ↓)

           Default         Tuned            Tuned + Ens.                     Default          Tuned           Tuned + Ens.
RF         0.933 ± 0.011   0.932 ± 0.011    0.932 ± 0.012       RF           0.312 ± 0.037    0.262 ± 0.019   0.257 ± 0.019
ExtraTrees 0.937 ± 0.011   0.937 ± 0.008    0.938 ± 0.008       ExtraTrees   0.312 ± 0.036    0.258 ± 0.020   0.250 ± 0.019
XGBoost    0.941 ± 0.008   0.943 ± 0.008    0.944 ± 0.008       XGBoost      0.260 ± 0.027    0.251 ± 0.022   0.251 ± 0.023
LightGBM 0.938 ± 0.008     0.943 ± 0.008    0.944 ± 0.007       LightGBM     0.255 ± 0.021    0.249 ± 0.021   0.247 ± 0.021
CatBoost   0.944 ± 0.006   0.944 ± 0.007    0.943 ± 0.006       CatBoost     0.252 ± 0.022    0.239 ± 0.022   0.239 ± 0.021
EBM        0.942 ± 0.005   0.940 ± 0.005    0.941 ± 0.004       EBM          0.357 ± 0.021    0.357 ± 0.020   0.357 ± 0.020
FastAIMLP 0.914 ± 0.022    0.923 ± 0.009    0.927 ± 0.010       FastAIMLP    0.334 ± 0.023    0.245 ± 0.022   0.241 ± 0.021
TorchMLP 0.925 ± 0.009     0.940 ± 0.007    0.943 ± 0.007       TorchMLP     0.289 ± 0.035    0.237 ± 0.020   0.230 ± 0.019
RealMLP    0.941 ± 0.006   0.941 ± 0.007    0.945 ± 0.006       RealMLP      0.256 ± 0.026    0.236 ± 0.026   0.232 ± 0.021
TabM       0.941 ± 0.004   0.942 ± 0.004    0.943 ± 0.004       TabM         0.246 ± 0.026    0.238 ± 0.027   0.236 ± 0.025
MNCA       0.940 ± 0.006   0.939 ± 0.010    0.932 ± 0.013       MNCA         0.261 ± 0.023    0.243 ± 0.025   0.239 ± 0.022
TabPFNv2 0.942 ± 0.005     0.943 ± 0.007    0.945 ± 0.008       TabPFNv2     0.229 ± 0.025    0.223 ± 0.027   0.222 ± 0.025
TabDPT     0.937 ± 0.008   -                -                   TabDPT       0.228 ± 0.027    -               -
TabICL     0.944 ± 0.006   -                -                   TabICL       0.228 ± 0.026    -               -
Linear     0.936 ± 0.005   0.938 ± 0.003    0.938 ± 0.003       Linear       0.360 ± 0.021    0.359 ± 0.023   0.358 ± 0.022
KNN        0.870 ± 0.017   0.925 ± 0.014    0.936 ± 0.007       KNN          0.938 ± 0.142    0.385 ± 0.048   0.299 ± 0.033
AutoGluon -                -                0.946 ± 0.006       AutoGluon    -                -               0.233 ± 0.021


                                              wine_quality (rmse ↓)

                                           Default          Tuned             Tuned + Ens.
                             RF            0.620 ± 0.021    0.616 ± 0.021     0.611 ± 0.021
                             ExtraTrees    0.613 ± 0.021    0.606 ± 0.025     0.603 ± 0.021
                             XGBoost       0.621 ± 0.021    0.610 ± 0.019     0.610 ± 0.020
                             LightGBM      0.628 ± 0.019    0.607 ± 0.019     0.608 ± 0.019
                             CatBoost      0.621 ± 0.019    0.605 ± 0.020     0.605 ± 0.020
                             EBM           0.679 ± 0.015    0.678 ± 0.016     0.675 ± 0.016
                             FastAIMLP     0.669 ± 0.019    0.668 ± 0.018     0.657 ± 0.019
                             TorchMLP      0.691 ± 0.019    0.653 ± 0.018     0.650 ± 0.015
                             RealMLP       0.625 ± 0.018    0.618 ± 0.019     0.603 ± 0.020
                             TabM          0.637 ± 0.020    0.620 ± 0.020     0.612 ± 0.020
                             MNCA          0.610 ± 0.020    0.606 ± 0.019     0.601 ± 0.020
                             TabPFNv2      0.692 ± 0.012    0.639 ± 0.017     0.610 ± 0.020
                             TabDPT        0.590 ± 0.018    -                 -
                             TabICL        -                -                 -
                             Linear        0.731 ± 0.017    0.731 ± 0.017     0.730 ± 0.016
                             KNN           0.627 ± 0.023    0.627 ± 0.022     0.617 ± 0.021
                             AutoGluon     -                -                 0.599 ± 0.020




                                                           66

==============================================================================
VISUAL FIGURE VALUE AUDIT
==============================================================================

# L20: Figure and table review

Source: pdfs/L20.pdf, *TabArena: A Living Benchmark for Machine Learning on Tabular Data* (2025), DOI 10.48550/arXiv.2506.16791.

## Figure 4, visual-only leaderboard, PDF page 7

Horizontal Elo intervals are shown for TabPFNv2-compatible datasets (left; 33 datasets, at most 10,000 training rows and 500 features) and TabICL-compatible datasets (right; 36 classification datasets, at most 100,000 rows and 500 features). X-axis is Elo, with ticks from 800 through 1,800. Point/bar endpoints are not numerically printed; do not transcribe pixel-derived Elo values as exact. Text nearby states that TabPFNv2 performs strongly when restricted to its supported subset.

## Figure 5, runtime/improvability, PDF page 8

Left panel plots median inference seconds per 1,000 samples on a logarithmic x-axis against improvability percent. Right panel plots median training time per 1,000 samples against improvability. Ensemble-size trajectory points correspond to 1, 2, 5, 10, 25, 50, 100, 150, and 201 random configurations. The scatter/curve points have no printed per-model values. Nearby prose states approximately 15x and 100x increases in inference time for selected TabM and RealMLP ensemble configurations; preserve these as the authors' prose values rather than readings from the plotted points.

## Figure 6, partial view on PDF page 8

Compares model efficiency and holdout versus cross-validation; quantitative point labels are not printed. The page begins its caption, with continuation on the following page. Do not infer exact values from the plot.

## Tables and remaining figures

Tables 1-4 and figures 1-7 appear in txt/L20.txt. Captions and nearby prose are searchable there. The visual review pages listed in visual_inventory.tsv should be checked for figure panels not covered in this note.

