SOURCE ID: L31
TITLE: Verification of forecasts expressed in terms of probability
YEAR: 1950
DOI: 10.1175/1520-0493(1950)078<0001:VOFEIT>2.0.CO;2
PDF: ../pdfs/L31.pdf
PAGES: 16
EXTRACTION: pdftotext -layout. Page breaks are form feeds. Check equations, tables, and figures against the PDF during visual audit.
==============================================================================

                                                                                                                                                                          FERMILAB-FN-1179-SCD


                                                                    Submitted to the Proceedings of the US Community Study
                                                                       on the Future of Particle Physics (Snowmass 2021)




                                                          Interpretable Uncertainty Quantification
                                                                        in AI for HEP
                                           Thomas Y. Chen1 , Biprateep Dey2 , Aishik Ghosh3,4 , Michael Kagan5 , Brian Nord6,7,8 , and Nesar




arXiv:2208.03284v2 [hep-ex] 8 Aug 2022
                                                                                   Ramachandra9
                                                        1 Fu Foundation School of Engineering and Applied Science, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA
                                                        2 Department of Physics and Astronomy and PITT PACC, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA
                                                                    3 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA
                                                                      4 Physics Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
                                                                               5 SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA
                                                                          6 Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, P.O. Box 500, Batavia, IL 60510, USA
                                                                    7 Kavli Institute for Cosmological Physics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA
                                                                 8 Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA
                                                     9 Computational Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory, 9700 South Cass Avenue, Lemont, IL 60439, USA




                                                                                                      August 10, 2022


                                                                                                                Abstract
                                                      Estimating uncertainty is at the core of performing scientific measurements in HEP:
                                                  a measurement is not useful without an estimate of its uncertainty. The goal of uncer-
                                                  tainty quantification (UQ) is inextricably linked to the question, “how do we physically
                                                  and statistically interpret these uncertainties?” The answer to this question depends
                                                  not only on the computational task we aim to undertake, but also on the methods
                                                  we use for that task. For artificial intelligence (AI) applications in HEP, there are
                                                  several areas where interpretable methods for UQ are essential, including inference,
                                                  simulation, and control/decision-making. There exist some methods for each of these
                                                  areas, but they have not yet been demonstrated to be as trustworthy as more tradi-
                                                  tional approaches currently employed in physics (e.g., non-AI frequentist and Bayesian
                                                  methods).
                                                      Shedding light on the questions above requires additional understanding of the in-
                                                  terplay of AI systems and uncertainty quantification. We briefly discuss the existing
                                                  methods in each area and relate them to tasks across HEP. We then discuss recom-
                                                  mendations for avenues to pursue to develop the necessary techniques for reliable
                                                  widespread usage of AI with UQ over the next decade.


                                         1        Requirements for uncertainties in physics
                                         What are the uncertainties we consider in HEP and in AI, and how do they relate or
                                         correspond to each other? The following brief text benefits from the excellent discussion
                                         on this topic in 2021 PDG review of AI in HEP [1].


                                                                                                                      1
                                         This manuscript has been authored by Fermi Research Alliance, LLC under Contract No. DE-AC02-07CH11359 with the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science,
                                         Office of High Energy Physics.
1.1 Definitions of Uncertainty in HEP
In HEP, uncertainties are often categorized as “statistical” and “systematic.” Statistical
uncertainties typically refer to error associated with the finite sizes of a data set. For
instance, in collider physics often a feature of the data, whose distribution is sensitive to a
parameter of interest, is computed for each collision event and the population is binned for
statistical inference. As such, the statistical model of counts in each bin follows a Poisson
distribution (e.g. the bins have a Poisson statistical error). Similarly in Astrophysics,
photon counting in measure image pixels follows a similar Poisson distribution.
    Systematic uncertainties typically arise due to an incomplete knowledge of the true
data generation process. When simulations (forward models) or analytic expressions (in-
verse models) are constructed with this incomplete knowledge, the difference is propa-
gated through inference process to create a systematic error. For example, this could be
uncertainty in the theoretical model of particle scattering, in particle-material interactions,
detector calibrations, or in the material description of a given detector. Systematic uncer-
tainties can also arise during the use of data-driven models, like those used in AI. Consider,
for example, in the case where control samples of the data are selected and used to form
a model of a background process that mimics a signal. Systematic uncertainties are of-
ten described with nuisance parameter ν, which parameterizes a continuous family of
data-generating processes. Predictions depend on these nuisance parameters. When simu-
lations and control samples don’t match the original data (which is always), we encounter
a domain transition (or adaptation) challenge
    In addition to statistical and systematic uncertainties, the process of detecting particles
is inherently uncertain and detectors have finite resolution; this resolution can be consid-
ered an inherent uncertainty in the detection process.


1.2 Definitions of Uncertainty in AI
In AI, uncertainty is often categorized broadly as “aleatoric” and “epistemic.” “Aleatoric”
uncertainty is often noted as being due to inherent randomness in the outcome of an
experiment. “Epistemic” uncertainty is often described as coming from a lack of knowledge
– e.g. a lack of knowledge about the model. In the AI literature, aleatoric uncertainty is
often considered irreducible and coming from the data generation process, while epistemic
uncertainty is discussed in terms of the uncertainty in model parameters and reduces when
more data is added to the training data set.
    Statistical error due to finite sample sizes and inherent randomness in measurements –
e.g. due to finite detector resolutions – are concepts well studied in HEP. Model uncertainty
in HEP often takes the form of a lack of knowledge in our physics models and is irreducible
without further measurements [1], and thus is more akin to a systematic uncertainty,
like a domain shift. More generally, the usage of ML uncertainty terminology and their
correspondence to HEP uncertainty terminology is often ambiguous. How we use and
interpret the various kinds uncertainties in a consistent way across AI-related analyses in
HEP remains an unresolved discussion and problem.
    The use of AI is growing across many sectors of HEP – e.g., reconstructing detector
data for estimating physical objects like particle momenta or galaxy properties; classifying

                                              2
detection events as signal or background; estimating the density of populations of events;
defining low-dimensional powerful features that can be used for inference; constructing
surrogate models of large-scale simulations; scheduling experimental data acquisition and
operating instruments.
    Depending on the task ML is used for and how inference on a data set is performed,
different kinds of uncertainties may be needed. In cases where the ML model predictions
determine the quality of a statistical model used to compare to data, careful attention to
uncertainty is needed. In other cases the quality of the ML model may determine the op-
timality of an analysis or test statistic, but would would not lead to incorrect inference
results; if and what uncertainties are needed in such cases also requires careful consider-
ation. In the case of problems relating to instrument/experiment control, where the goal
is predictive modeling of future states and to determine actions for a system to take, the
full suite of related systematic uncertainties – AI model parameter uncertainty, resolutions
of measurements, statistical, and domain shift – are notably essential to assess risk of and
protect the data acquisition process and the instrument itself.


1.3 Inference for Parameter Estimation
A primary goal in HEP is to estimate the parameters θ of a physical model – e.g., the Stan-
dard Model of particle physics or the cosmological ΛCDM model – from experimental data,
y. In collider physics, frequentist methods are common and the profile likelihood ratio test
statistic is typically used for confidence interval estimation. In addition, in collider physics
inference often takes the form of unfolding, wherein the corruption of particle properties
due to the stochastic nature of detectors is removed (e.g. de-convolved). Bayesian infer-
ence has been in widespread use in cosmology since approximately 2010 – almost to the
exception of frequentism. Indeed, the field is moving toward the use of Bayesian hierar-
chical models to simultaneous capture global features of the universe (e.g., cosmic dark
matter density) and local features of individual objects (e.g., mass of one galaxy).
    When one aims to model high-dimensional feature spaces, the estimation of the likeli-
hood, the likelihood ratio, and the posterior all become extremely challenging. Simulation-
Based Inference (SBI; aka, likelihood-free inference or implicit likelihood inference) has
emerged as a subfield that uses AI with multi-fidelity simulators to efficiently and effec-
tively perform such inference tasks [2]. Using the likelihood ratio trick, learned classifiers
between different parameter hypothesis can be used to approximate likelihood ratios, and
several strategies to perform this estimation efficiently have been proposed [3]. Similarly,
using powerful normalizing flow models, which are capable of explicitly modeling high
dimensional data densities, schemes have been developed to estimate likelihoods and pos-
teriors [4].


2    Modern Approaches to UQ in AI
Predictive uncertainty associated with the output depends on both the AI model and the
data. The terms “epistemic uncertainty” (also referred to as “systematic” or “model” un-
certainty) and “aleatoric uncertainty” (also known as “statistical” or “data” uncertainty)

                                               3
are commonly used in AI literature to differentiate these sources of errors [5, 6]. How-
ever, while the terms are sometimes used interchangeably, these correspondences don’t
consistently hold up across all problems and model-building scenarios.
    In the context of scientific AI, however, the predictive uncertainties also depend on the
mismatch between the data domains. For instance, a deep neural network (DNN) trained
solely on numerical astrophysical simulations will have additional uncertainties associ-
ated when applied to real telescope observations. Such dataset-dependent uncertainties
could be due to a domain transition (when the coverage or distribution of training data
does not match with those of the real data) or due to out-of-domain information (train-
ing simulations not capturing all the effects of the physical phenomena) [7]. The above
classifications are neither universal nor exhaustive, and uncertainty quantification must
be specific to a particular AI approach to the scientific problem. The exact representation
of uncertainty in an AI approach is often not fully known, due to the caveats mentioned
above. Memory usage, convergence or training time, scaling across computing nodes, and
other practical considerations play vital roles in the particular choice of a model for a given
problem. Hence, AI-based uncertainty approximation remains a popular research avenue
with variety of methods in active development [7–9].
    In this section, we briefly mention a few popular categories of these UQ approaches.

   • Emulator-based posterior estimation: A conservative approach to performing Bayesian
     approximation involves using AI surrogates in forward models or explicit likelihoods
     in Bayesian inference schemes such as Markhov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) tech-
     niques. These emulator-based approaches [e.g., 10–14] are now widely used in cos-
     mological survey sciences. Coupled with active sampling techniques, one may also
     consider SBI methods [15] using neural density estimators. Recent work on dif-
     ferentiable emulators [16–18] also paves the way for faster posterior sampling via
     Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) techniques.
   • Sampling over network parameters: neural networks could be used as inference
     machines as alternatives to traditional posterior estimation techniques, by sampling
     over the model parameters of network weights and biases [19]. This involves treat-
     ing neural network’s parameters as something you’d want to do posterior analysis
     over, by MCMC (or some other technique). The numerical expense of sampling over
     a large number of model parameters (multiple training experiments?) can be nu-
     merically expensive, as is the case with deep neural networks. However, with GPU-
     accelerators and AI-specific hardware, HMC sampling over a relatively small number
     network parameters will be within reach in the near future.
   • Variational Inference (VI): This family of approaches approximate and learn the
     posterior distribution over network weights and biases. These VI-based methods ef-
     fectively convert the statistical inference problem to a familiar network optimization
     problem, where a loss metric is optimized via gradient descent algorithms. A popular
     network that uses VI is the variational auto-encoder used in HEP problems that re-
     quire generative modeling or dimension-reduction [20, 21]. Normalizing flow mod-
     els [22] also use VI to construct complex distributions by transforming a probability
     density through a series of invertible mappings. Another widely used VI approach

                                              4
  of Monte Carlo Dropout (MC Dropout) uses a regularization technique of dropout
  layers [23] to an approximate a variational distribution. The trade-off between the
  quality of uncertainty estimates and the computational complexity is a notable fea-
  ture of various VI-approaches: versions of MC dropout provice uncertainty estimates
  with little to no overhead during training time.

• Deep ensemble methods: Another approach to predicting UQ from point-estimating
  DNNs is to train a large number of networks, and use the ensemble distribution to
  predict the posterior prediction [24]. With an ensemble, each individually trained
  network has its own loss function. This is in contrast to sampling over NN’s, where
  there aren’t individual loss functions The ensemble of networks can be obtained by
  either on batches of data or different architectures, random weight initializations,
  MC Dropout, bootstrapping or other techniques. Ensemble-based UQ using sampling
  techniques like active learning or hyperparameter optimization [25, 26] are also cur-
  rently explored in massive supercomputing environments. Averaging in the weight
  space, instead of the predictions, at different stages of training also results in a com-
  putationally inexpensive and reliable estimate of UQ [27].

• Deep Gaussian Processes: A Conventional Gaussian process (GP) is a non-parametric
  Bayesian model that provides uncertainty estimates on predictions, even with small
  number of training datapoints. The Deep GP is a composition of GPs that can effec-
  tively scale at large datasets using VI [28]. Deep GPs are demonstrated to perform
  better than several AI UQ techniques for domain shifts and against adversarial agents
  [29].

• Test-time implementations: Multiple predictions from a point-prediction or a prob-
  abilistic network can be augmented to evaluate the error in the predictions [30].
  Such approaches are extremely useful in error propagation, wherein the input data
  from the sensors can be noisy [31].

• Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs): These are typically optimized through VI.
  These incorporate parameters of a distribution for the the weights of an activation
  neuron [32].

• Conformal methods: A class of algorithms that use past experiences to determine
  levels of confidence in new predictions. Once a point prediction is made, a non-
  conformity score is constructed, which is a measure of how unusual the new example
  is compared to previously seen examples – i.e., a labeled calibration set. The con-
  formal algorithm then converts this non-conformity score into a prediction region.
  Conformal methods can be used with any estimator, are computationally efficient
  and guarantee finite sample marginal coverage [33, 34].

• Simulation-based inference (SBI): Also known as implicit likelihood inference (or
  the misnomer, likelihood-free inference), SBI sequesters the model to the simulator
  only [2]. For a given choice of parameters of interest, a high-fidelity simulation (in-
  cluding the internal/hidden physical mechanisms and the observational signatures)


                                           5
      is compared to observations. If the simulation matches the observation, these pa-
      rameters are selected as the best parameters to represent reality. Sometimes, these
      methods use normalizing flows for neural density estimation.
      There are also methods in Reinforcement Learning and other areas of ML that are
      of interest to physics, which may be used in observation scheduling and instrument
      control. Some of these are discussed in this recent review [35].

    Numerous implementations of these UQ algorithm families have started to shift the
landscape of AI from deterministic models to those that are more probabilistic. Depend-
ing on the research problem, each of these methods have advantages and drawbacks. For
instance, the MC dropout and test-time approaches are computationally inexpensive com-
pared to the methods that involve sampling. We restrict the discussion of the UQ methods
to the above, but note again that numerous implementations within each family tackle the
issue of achieving robust UQ predictions using neural networks.


2.1 Calibration of Uncertainty Estimates
AI-based algorithms quote uncertainty estimates as probability distributions: they may
be class probabilities for a classification task, or a credibility interval or a full probability
distribution function for regression tasks. Calibration refers to the property of such prob-
abilistic estimates to be consistent with the frequency of occurrence of the target variable
in observed populations. For example, if an algorithm predicts a class probability of 0.8
or produces an 80% credibility interval, then the true value should fall in the predicted
class or the credibility interval 80% of the time for any arbitrary test set. Though cali-
bration seems like a simple property, most common machine learning algorithms provide
mis-calibrated probabilistic estimates [36–40]. Though the term “calibration” is widely
used to refer to this property in the AI community, the term “coverage” is more popular in
the statistics community.
    We want models to produce calibrated uncertainty estimates, because we would like
to interpret probabilistic estimates as long run frequencies. Mis-calibrated uncertainty
estimates used as input for a physical analysis will result in biased estimates of physical
quantities.
    Calibration performance of AI-based methods is generally assessed by comparing the
predicted probability of a prediction belonging to a class (or a credibility interval) against
their empirical probabilities calculated using a test set: ideally both the quantities should
be equal. This is quantified using metrics like Expected Calibration Error [ECE; 41], Brier
score [42], Probability Integral Transform [PIT; 43], etc. All of these tests fail to condition
on the class and input features, but rather asses the calibration of probabilistic estimates as
an ensemble and not on an individual basis [44, 45]. Moreover some of these metrics are
optimized through completely un-physical probability estimates[46]. Therefore, metrics
and tests should be developed to measure the calibration of individual uncertainty esti-
mates (i.e., local calibration/conditional coverage) and not just for ensembles (i.e., global
calibration/marginal coverage) as inconsistencies in various regions of the feature space
cancel out to produce deceptively optimal results when looked as an ensemble[45, 47, 48].


                                               6
    Generally, it is easier to use generic re-calibration methods on outputs of existing al-
gorithms than to develop custom workarounds for each of them. Therefore, methods like
Plat scaling [49] and Isotonic regression [50] are widely used to re-calibrate outputs of AI-
based uncertainty estimates. However, they suffer from the same problems as the metrics
discussed immediately above in terms of their inability to ensure local calibration (condi-
tional coverage) and therefore new methods should be developed to perform re-calibration
of uncertainty estimates while ensuring local calibration [51–54].


2.2 Bias Mitigation
It is often very expensive to get labeled data from experiments and observations that also
span the entire range of feature space of interest, but it is often that we have a complete
set of unlabeled or simulated data. One approach to minimizing biases in our training
data would be to train on simulations and then use transfer learning (or domain adapta-
tion) methods on observed data. Similarly, we can also use self-supervised learning on an
unlabeled data set and then fine tune to labeled data.
     HEP heavily relies on comparing unlabeled (observed) data to labeled (simulation or
observed) data) to infer parameters of mathematical models that describe our universe:
e.g., AI models are often trained on simulations and then applied to data. Systematic differ-
ences between the simulations and observed data can thus bias physics results. The origin
of such differences could be due to limitations in computational power, the limited power
of some statistical technique applied, our ignorance about the exact state of a detector, or
our inability to correctly model certain physics processes accurately within the simulation.
The nature of the systematic uncertainty informs the appropriate mitigation/quantification
mechanism [55].

2.2.1 Transfer Learning (TL) and Domain Adaptation (DA)
When an AI algorithm is trained on data that is not representative of, or biased in relation
to, the testing data, this results in differences in the distribution between training and
testing sets. Training on unbiased data is often not possible (or it is computationally
burdensome) due to limitations in generation of the data. Domain adaptation and transfer
learning are nascent research directions under the umbrella of AI that focus on resolving
these differences, aiding in generalization of a HEP events classifier from a source dataset
to a target domain. For example, TL has been used to fine-tune a DNN trained on generic
imagery to suit the particular task of neutrino interaction classification, as an insufficient
number of simulated events were available as data to train the specific use-case model
directly [56]. Additionally, an adversarial learning-based DA approach was proposed to
successfully mitigate bias in simulated event classification at the LHC [57, 58].

2.2.2 De-correlation methods to reduce bias in a statistical technique
A frequently used technique in HEP is to fit a smoothly falling parametric function to a
background distribution (in some feature, like mass or momentum) to estimate its contri-
bution in the signal region. While applying AI models to filter away uninteresting events

                                              7
improves the sensitivity – therefore shrinking the statistical uncertainty on the final re-
sult – it can reshape the background distribution in undesired ways, resulting in larger
systematic uncertainties. If the background distribution is no longer smoothly falling, it
could result in a large bias. Several recently proposed AI methods are able to reduce the
correlation between the output of the model and some given feature to avoid sculpting
the background distribution, or between the output of the model and nuisance parameters
defining systematic uncertainties [57, 59]. This sacrifices classification power to reduce
the overall bias, but therefore improves the total (statistical and systematic) uncertainty
for the final physics result.

2.2.3 Uncertainties with a statistical origin
Some systematic uncertainties have a statistical origin, for example the state of a detector,
z, may be measured or calibrated using some auxiliary data and reported as a maximum
likelihood estimate, z0 , along with an uncertainty. This uncertainty provides a probabilistic
prior P (z) on z. If an AI model is trained on simulations that assume the detector is in
state z0 , the uncertainty can then be estimated by evaluating the bias of the model on other
simulations that assume the detector in some other states, z− , z+ . The final physics result
may be reported such that the total uncertainty accounts for every possible bias in z, as
well as its associated prior in P (z).
    AI offers an opportunity to take it a step further by reducing the final uncertainty of
such a physics result. De-correlation methods may also be applied in this case to make
the AI model insensitive to change in z, again sacrificing the classification power of the
model in favor invariance to z, which results in increased statistical uncertainties but re-
duces systematic uncertainties. For example, a classifier can be forced to perform similarly
on simulated and observed data in the control region to ensure that it does not learn any
artifacts arising from inaccuracies in the simulation. However, for these kinds of uncertain-
ties, a more appropriate solution is precisely the opposite idea, adaptive risk minimisation.
An uncertainty-aware model is made maximally sensitive to the origin of the bias by pa-
rameterizing it on z. This model provides an optimal classifier for every value of z. This
reduces the statistical component of the final uncertainty and allows us to better extract
information about the true value of z from data, which can be combined with the prior
P (z) to further improve the final result.
    While classifiers are trained for all the above discussed methods, the classifier objective
acts only as a proxy for the final objective of a physics analysis. Inference-aware learning,
where the true objective is directly optimized with differentiable programming, provides
another tool to directly reduce the total uncertainty of a physics result. A model that is
both inference-aware and uncertainty-aware is likely to provide close to optimal results.
Since differentiable programming requires encoding the analysis-specific objective into dif-
ferentiable code, this is a new skill that physicists will have to acquire in the future.

2.2.4 Uncertainties without a statistical origin
In contrast to the kind of uncertainties discussed above, certain systematic uncertainties
lack a statistical origin. There is no probabilistic prior and it is often impossible to simu-

                                              8
late the full range of possible biases coming from them. For example consider theoretical
uncertainties that arise due to our inability to correctly model and compute QFT. Different
hadronization models [60, 61] predict slightly different results but do not span the full
range of possible mismodelling errors. The differences between two available hadroniza-
tion models are often used as an ad hoc quantification of the uncertainty on hadronization
modelling. The systematic uncertainties that arise because we are unable to compute QFT
at infinite order are also estimated using similar well-motivated guesswork. Unphysical
scales in the computation are varied in the simulation and the sensitivity of a physics re-
sult to these variations is treated as a systematic uncertainty. While this helps ascertain a
rough estimate of the potential bias, the uncertainty band does not come from any rigorous
statistical method for estimating an uncertainty.
    While it may be tempting to apply AI-based de-correlation techniques to make a model
insensitive to these biases, there is a danger in this case of significantly underestimating the
true bias and uncertainties as discussed in Ref. [62]. Since the uncertainty quantification
is not based on a robust statistical technique, attempting to reduce the uncertainty using
AI may result simply in reducing our ad hoc estimate of the uncertainty, rather than the
true uncertainty.
    The best way to make concrete progress for such uncertainties is to develop a better un-
derstanding of their origin so that they can eventually be treated using a robust statistical
model.


3     Recommendations
Below, we propose a list of guidelines in the context of interpretable UQ for our community
to be better equipped to drive forward the progress in the field of AI-augmented HEP
research. While some of these guidelines apply generally to good approaches in data-
driven science research [63], we focus on recommendations pertinent to AI. Overall, we
emphasize that UQ for AI must become physically interpretable for usage in physics
context.

    • Develop rigorous tests of local calibration.

    • The HEP, Statistics, and AI communities should increase interaction to develop lan-
      guage that accurately reflects concepts relevant to both communities. Within 10
      years, we should have a united lexicon for discussing and assessing interpretable
      uncertainties in AI for HEP.

    • The HEP-Stats-AI community should create benchmark data sets for rigorous testing
      and comparison of approaches to physically interpretable AI UQ for physics.

    • Funding agencies should endorse challenges and competitions within funding oppor-
      tunity announcements to create and compare methods of UQ, including bias mitiga-
      tion.




                                               9
 • Develop and compare methods of feature visualisation and interpretability, explain-
   ability, physics-awareness tools – e.g., Local interpretable model-agnostic explana-
   tions (LIME) values, Shapley values, partial dependency plots, or Accumulated local
   effects (ALE) [64].

 • Bring physically interpretable AI UQ to non-physics problems where appropriate
   (e.g., social science) to help improve risk assessment.

 • Common AI UQ methods should be embedded into deep learning software suites,
   similar to SKLearn, to enable widespread usage, testing, and comparison in the HEP
   community.

 • AI adoption in HEP continues to lag behind latest methodologies. The HEP commu-
   nity should prioritize finding, testing, and comparing new methods generated by the
   AI community as soon as they emerge.


References
[1] P.A. Zyla et al. Review of Particle Physics. PTEP, 2020(8):083C01, 2020.

[2] Kyle Cranmer, Johann Brehmer, and Gilles Louppe. The frontier of simulation-based
    inference. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 117(48):30055–30062, 2020.

[3] Johann Brehmer, Gilles Louppe, Juan Pavez, and Kyle Cranmer. Mining gold from
    implicit models to improve likelihood-free inference. Proceedings of the National
    Academy of Sciences, 117(10):5242–5249, 2020.

[4] George Papamakarios, Eric Nalisnick, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Shakir Mohamed,
    and Balaji Lakshminarayanan. Normalizing flows for probabilistic modeling and in-
    ference. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(57):1–64, 2021.

[5] Eyke Hüllermeier and Willem Waegeman. Aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty in
    machine learning: An introduction to concepts and methods. Machine Learning,
    110(3):457–506, 2021.

[6] Armen Der Kiureghian and Ove Ditlevsen. Aleatory or epistemic? does it matter?
    Structural safety, 31(2):105–112, 2009.

[7] Jakob Gawlikowski, Cedrique Rovile Njieutcheu Tassi, Mohsin Ali, Jongseok Lee,
    Matthias Humt, Jianxiang Feng, Anna Kruspe, Rudolph Triebel, Peter Jung, Ribana
    Roscher, et al. A survey of uncertainty in deep neural networks. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2107.03342, 2021.

[8] Yiping Li, Jianwen Chen, and Ling Feng. Dealing with uncertainty: A survey
    of theories and practices. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering,
    25(11):2463–2482, 2012.



                                         10
 [9] Niclas Ståhl, Göran Falkman, Alexander Karlsson, and Gunnar Mathiason. Evalua-
     tion of uncertainty quantification in deep learning. In International Conference on
     Information Processing and Management of Uncertainty in Knowledge-Based Systems,
     pages 556–568. Springer, 2020.

[10] Katrin Heitmann, Earl Lawrence, Juliana Kwan, Salman Habib, and David Higdon.
     The coyote universe extended: precision emulation of the matter power spectrum.
     The Astrophysical Journal, 780(1):111, 2013.

[11] Thomas McClintock, Eduardo Rozo, Arka Banerjee, Matthew R. Becker, Joseph
     DeRose, Sean McLaughlin, Jeremy L. Tinker, Risa H. Wechsler, and Zhongxu Zhai.
     The Aemulus Project IV: Emulating Halo Bias. arXiv e-prints, page arXiv:1907.13167,
     July 2019.

[12] Zhongxu Zhai, Jeremy L. Tinker, Matthew R. Becker, Joseph DeRose, Yao-Yuan Mao,
     Thomas McClintock, Sean McLaughlin, Eduardo Rozo, and Risa H. Wechsler. The
     Aemulus Project. III. Emulation of the Galaxy Correlation Function. The Astrophysical
     Journal, 874(1):95, March 2019.

[13] Yosuke Kobayashi, Takahiro Nishimichi, Masahiro Takada, Ryuichi Takahashi, and
     Ken Osato. Accurate emulator for the redshift-space power spectrum of dark matter
     halos and its application to galaxy power spectrum. Phys. Rev. D, 102(6):063504,
     September 2020.

[14] Nesar Ramachandra, Georgios Valogiannis, Mustapha Ishak, Katrin Heitmann, LSST
     Dark Energy Science Collaboration, et al. Matter power spectrum emulator for f (r)
     modified gravity cosmologies. Physical Review D, 103(12):123525, 2021.

[15] Justin Alsing, Tom Charnock, Stephen Feeney, and Benjamin Wandelt. Fast
     likelihood-free cosmology with neural density estimators and active learning.
     Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 488(3):4440–4458, 2019.

[16] Chirag Modi, Francois Lanusse, and Uros Seljak. Flowpm: Distributed tensorflow
     implementation of the fastpm cosmological n-body solver. Astronomy and Computing,
     37:100505, 2021.

[17] Andrew P Hearin, Jonás Chaves-Montero, Matthew R Becker, and Alex Alarcon. A
     differentiable model of the assembly of individual and populations of dark matter
     halos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.05859, 2021.

[18] Andrew P Hearin, Nesar Ramachandra, Matthew R Becker, and Joseph DeRose.
     Differentiable predictions for large scale structure with shamnet. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2112.08423, 2021.

[19] Radford M Neal. Bayesian learning for neural networks, volume 118. Springer Science
     & Business Media, 2012.




                                           11
[20] Olmo Cerri, Thong Q Nguyen, Maurizio Pierini, Maria Spiropulu, and Jean-Roch Vli-
     mant. Variational autoencoders for new physics mining at the large hadron collider.
     Journal of High Energy Physics, 2019(5):1–29, 2019.

[21] Andrew J Larkoski, Ian Moult, and Benjamin Nachman. Jet substructure at the large
     hadron collider: a review of recent advances in theory and machine learning. Physics
     Reports, 841:1–63, 2020.

[22] Danilo Rezende and Shakir Mohamed. Variational inference with normalizing flows.
     In International conference on machine learning, pages 1530–1538. PMLR, 2015.

[23] Yarin Gal and Zoubin Ghahramani. Dropout as a bayesian approximation: Repre-
     senting model uncertainty in deep learning. In international conference on machine
     learning, pages 1050–1059. PMLR, 2016.

[24] Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and Scal-
     able Predictive Uncertainty Estimation using Deep Ensembles. arXiv e-prints, page
     arXiv:1612.01474, December 2016.

[25] Prasanna Balaprakash, Michael Salim, Thomas D Uram, Venkat Vishwanath, and
     Stefan M Wild. Deephyper: Asynchronous hyperparameter search for deep neural
     networks. In 2018 IEEE 25th international conference on high performance computing
     (HiPC), pages 42–51. IEEE, 2018.

[26] Romain Egele, Romit Maulik, Krishnan Raghavan, Prasanna Balaprakash, and
     Bethany Lusch. Autodeuq: Automated deep ensemble with uncertainty quantifi-
     cation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.13511, 2021.

[27] Pavel Izmailov, Dmitrii Podoprikhin, Timur Garipov, Dmitry Vetrov, and Andrew Gor-
     don Wilson. Averaging weights leads to wider optima and better generalization.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05407, 2018.

[28] Andreas Damianou and Neil D Lawrence. Deep gaussian processes. In Artificial
     intelligence and statistics, pages 207–215. PMLR, 2013.

[29] John Bradshaw, Alexander G de G Matthews, and Zoubin Ghahramani. Adversarial
     examples, uncertainty, and transfer testing robustness in gaussian process hybrid
     deep networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.02476, 2017.

[30] Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-
     scale image recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.

[31] Nesar Ramachandra, Jonás Chaves-Montero, Alex Alarcon, Arindam Fadikar, Salman
     Habib, and Katrin Heitmann. Machine learning synthetic spectra for probabilistic
     redshift estimation: Syth-z. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.12118, 2021.

[32] Yarin Gal. Uncertainty in Deep Learning. PhD thesis, University of Cambridge, 2016.



                                           12
[33] Glenn Shafer and Vladimir Vovk. A tutorial on conformal prediction. J. Mach. Learn.
     Res., 9:371–421, 2008.

[34] Jing Lei, Max G’Sell, Alessandro Rinaldo, Ryan J Tibshirani, and Larry Wasserman.
     Distribution-free predictive inference for regression. Journal of the American Statisti-
     cal Association, 113(523):1094–1111, 2018.

[35] Moloud Abdar, Farhad Pourpanah, Sadiq Hussain, Dana Rezazadegan, Li Liu, Mo-
     hammad Ghavamzadeh, Paul Fieguth, Xiaochun Cao, Abbas Khosravi, U. Rajendra
     Acharya, Vladimir Makarenkov, and Saeid Nahavandi. A review of uncertainty quan-
     tification in deep learning: Techniques, applications and challenges. Information
     Fusion, 76:243–297, dec 2021.

[36] Alexandru Niculescu-Mizil and Rich Caruana. Predicting good probabilities with su-
     pervised learning. In Luc De Raedt and Stefan Wrobel, editors, Machine Learning,
     Proceedings of the Twenty-Second International Conference (ICML 2005), Bonn, Ger-
     many, August 7-11, 2005, volume 119 of ACM International Conference Proceeding
     Series, pages 625–632. ACM, 2005.

[37] Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q. Weinberger. On calibration of modern
     neural networks. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh, editors, Proceedings of the 34th
     International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2017, Sydney, NSW, Australia,
     6-11 August 2017, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages
     1321–1330. PMLR, 2017.

[38] Benjamin Kompa, Jasper Snoek, and Andrew L. Beam. Empirical frequentist coverage
     of deep learning uncertainty quantification procedures. Entropy, 23(12):1608, 2021.

[39] Andrey Malinin and Mark J. F. Gales. Predictive uncertainty estimation via prior
     networks. In Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Kristen Grauman,
     Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, and Roman Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems 31: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
     2018, NeurIPS 2018, December 3-8, 2018, Montréal, Canada, pages 7047–7058,
     2018.

[40] Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scal-
     able predictive uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. In Isabelle Guyon,
     Ulrike von Luxburg, Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Rob Fergus, S. V. N. Vish-
     wanathan, and Roman Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, De-
     cember 4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pages 6402–6413, 2017.

[41] Mahdi Pakdaman Naeini, Gregory F. Cooper, and Milos Hauskrecht. Obtaining well
     calibrated probabilities using bayesian binning. In Blai Bonet and Sven Koenig, ed-
     itors, Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Jan-
     uary 25-30, 2015, Austin, Texas, USA, pages 2901–2907. AAAI Press, 2015.



                                             13
[42] GLENN W. BRIER. Verification of forecasts expressed in terms of probability. Monthly
     Weather Review, 78(1):1 – 3, 1950.

[43] F. F. Gan and K. J. Koehler. Goodness-of-fit tests based on p-p probability plots.
     Technometrics, 32(3):289–303, 1990.

[44] Jeremy Nixon, Michael W. Dusenberry, Linchuan Zhang, Ghassen Jerfel, and Dustin
     Tran. Measuring calibration in deep learning. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
     and Pattern Recognition Workshops, CVPR Workshops 2019, Long Beach, CA, USA, June
     16-20, 2019, pages 38–41. Computer Vision Foundation / IEEE, 2019.

[45] David Zhao, Niccolò Dalmasso, Rafael Izbicki, and Ann B. Lee. Diagnostics for con-
     ditional density models and bayesian inference algorithms. In Cassio P. de Cam-
     pos, Marloes H. Maathuis, and Erik Quaeghebeur, editors, Proceedings of the Thirty-
     Seventh Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, UAI 2021, Virtual Event,
     27-30 July 2021, volume 161 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages
     1830–1840. AUAI Press, 2021.

[46] S. J. Schmidt, A. I. Malz, J. Y. H. Soo, I. A. Almosallam, M. Brescia, S. Cavuoti,
     J. Cohen-Tanugi, A. J. Connolly, J. DeRose, P. E. Freeman, M. L. Graham, K. G. Iyer,
     M. J. Jarvis, J. B. Kalmbach, E. Kovacs, A. B. Lee, G. Longo, C. B. Morrison, J. A.
     Newman, E. Nourbakhsh, E. Nuss, T. Pospisil, H. Tranin, R. H. Wechsler, R. Zhou,
     R. Izbicki, and LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration. Evaluation of probabilistic
     photometric redshift estimation approaches for The Rubin Observatory Legacy Sur-
     vey of Space and Time (LSST). Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society,
     499(2):1587–1606, December 2020.

[47] Wittawat Jitkrittum, Heishiro Kanagawa, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Testing goodness
     of fit of conditional density models with kernels. In Ryan P. Adams and Vibhav
     Gogate, editors, Proceedings of the Thirty-Sixth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial
     Intelligence, UAI 2020, virtual online, August 3-6, 2020, volume 124 of Proceedings of
     Machine Learning Research, pages 221–230. AUAI Press, 2020.

[48] Rachel Luo, Aadyot Bhatnagar, Yu Bai, Shengjia Zhao, Huan Wang, Caiming Xiong,
     Silvio Savarese, Stefano Ermon, Edward Schmerling, and Marco Pavone. Local Cali-
     bration: Metrics and Recalibration. arXiv e-prints, page arXiv:2102.10809, February
     2021.

[49] John C. Platt. Probabilistic outputs for support vector machines and comparisons
     to regularized likelihood methods. In ADVANCES IN LARGE MARGIN CLASSIFIERS,
     pages 61–74. MIT Press, 1999.

[50] Bianca Zadrozny and Charles Elkan. Transforming classifier scores into accurate mul-
     ticlass probability estimates. In Proceedings of the Eighth ACM SIGKDD International
     Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, July 23-26, 2002, Edmonton,
     Alberta, Canada, pages 694–699. ACM, 2002.



                                             14
[51] Biprateep Dey, Jeffrey A. Newman, Brett H. Andrews, Rafael Izbicki, Ann B. Lee,
     David Zhao, Markus Michael Rau, and Alex I. Malz. Re-calibrating Photometric Red-
     shift Probability Distributions Using Feature-space Regression. arXiv e-prints, page
     arXiv:2110.15209, October 2021.
[52] Zhipeng Ding, Xu Han, Peirong Liu, and Marc Niethammer. Local temperature scaling
     for probability calibration. In 2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
     Vision, ICCV 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada, October 10-17, 2021, pages 6869–6879.
     IEEE, 2021.
[53] Niccolo Dalmasso, David Zhao, Rafael Izbicki, and Ann B Lee. Likelihood-free fre-
     quentist inference: Bridging classical statistics and machine learning in simulation
     and uncertainty quantification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03920, 2021.
[54] Biprateep Dey, David Zhao, Jeffrey A Newman, Brett H Andrews, Rafael Izbicki,
     and Ann B Lee. Calibrated predictive distributions via diagnostics for conditional
     coverage. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.14568, 2022.
[55] Nesar Ramachandra, Jonás Chaves-Montero, Alex Alarcon, Arindam Fadikar, Salman
     Habib, and Katrin Heitmann. Machine learning synthetic spectra for probabilistic
     redshift estimation: SYTH-Z. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 06
     2022. stac1790.
[56] Andrew Chappell and Leigh H Whitehead. Application of transfer learning to neu-
     trino interaction classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.03139, 2022.
[57] Gilles Louppe, Michael Kagan, and Kyle Cranmer. Learning to pivot with adver-
     sarial networks. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus,
     S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
[58] Jose M Clavijo, Paul Glaysher, Jenia Jitsev, and JM Katzy. Adversarial domain adapta-
     tion to reduce sample bias of a high energy physics event classifier. Machine learning:
     science and technology, 3(1):015014, 2021.
[59] Gregor Kasieczka and David Shih. Robust jet classifiers through distance correlation.
     Phys. Rev. Lett., 125:122001, Sep 2020.
[60] Torbjorn Sjostrand, Stephen Mrenna, and Peter Z. Skands. A Brief Introduction to
     PYTHIA 8.1. Comput. Phys. Commun., 178:852–867, 2008.
[61] M. Bahr et al. Herwig++ Physics and Manual. Eur. Phys. J. C, 58:639–707, 2008.
[62] Aishik Ghosh and Benjamin Nachman. A cautionary tale of decorrelating theory
     uncertainties. Eur. Phys. J. C, 82(1):46, 2022.
[63] Alyssa Goodman, Alberto Pepe, Alexander W Blocker, Christine L Borgman, Kyle
     Cranmer, Merce Crosas, Rosanne Di Stefano, Yolanda Gil, Paul Groth, Margaret Hed-
     strom, et al. Ten simple rules for the care and feeding of scientific data. PLoS compu-
     tational biology, 10(4):e1003542, 2014.

                                            15
[64] Diogo V Carvalho, Eduardo M Pereira, and Jaime S Cardoso. Machine learning inter-
     pretability: A survey on methods and metrics. Electronics, 8(8):832, 2019.




                                         16
